I accept the matter of the whole world at the beginning as in a state of general dispersion
and make of it a complete chaos.
I see this matter forming itself in accordance with the established laws of attraction and
modifying its movement by repulsion.
I enjoy the pleasure, without having recourse to arbitrary hypotheses of seeing a well-ordered
whole produced under the regulation of the established laws of motion, and this whole
looks so like that system of the world before our eyes that I cannot refuse to identify
it with it.
I will therefore not deny that the theory of Lucretius, or his predecessors, Epicurus,
Lusapus, and Democritus, has much resemblance with mine.
It seems to me that we can hearsay with intelligent certainty and without audacity, give me matter
and I will construct a world out of it."
That's Emanuel Kant from his Natural History of the Heavens, and that particular section
is quoted by Friedrich Nietzsche in his lectures on the pre-plotonic philosophers.
What we see in this quotation from Kant is an enthusiasm for science and for the explanatory
power of the scientific method.
Kant here sees his forerunners all the way back in the philosophers before Plato and
Socrates, referencing Democritus, the father of atomism.
Kant recognizes a resemblance in their theories, but also a common spirit, a common goal or
quest, not just a praise of science for its ability to answer individual empirical questions,
but to construct a world.
And there is a beauty to Kant's expression here.
That one could begin with a few starting principles, laws of motion and dispersion as
he calls them, general patterns or properties of how matter behaves, and then from these
starting parameters come to gain a coherent understanding of the immeasurably complex
reality that we live in.
For Kant, this is the allure of science.
And so I want to pose the question to all of us, what is the point of science?
It may seem like a strange question for us to ask today, but I think it's worth reflecting
on because, I mean, first of all, it seems obvious that we should be able to answer it.
But secondly, it's not a question that science itself can't answer, at least science the
way that we understand it today, and this is because it's a question of values.
Why do we value science?
Why do we pursue scientific knowledge?
Admittedly, I don't think that for most of us these questions are all that difficult
to answer.
But let's take the question seriously and assume for the sake of argument that it really
matters what our answer is, and whether we have the right answer.
And of course, we'll find that not everyone has the same answer, which is a problem in
and of itself.
Furthermore, the framework on which one should base their answer is not obvious either.
I mean, suppose we appeal to what might be the commonplace view that science is valuable
because of its utility, science gives us power over the world.
Or suppose we appeal to the more philosophical view that science is worth pursuing because
truth is valuable in and of itself, and science helps us gain knowledge and more importantly
to falsify incorrect knowledge so it gets us closer to the truth.
Science is good because truth is good, right?
And science is the best way of verifying or falsifying truth statements.
Or maybe we take an older view, the view of Kant, as I quoted from him at the beginning,
that science is part of a broader project of human knowledge, attempting to gain a complete
rational understanding of the world around them.
You could find positives or negatives to each of those descriptions of what science is or
what the value of science is, and have arguments for or against.
But ultimately, my point in bringing this up is that we would have to conclude that when
it comes to questions of values, we have no definitive means of settling these questions.
We know scientific means.
And so this takes us into territory that we might call metascience, or a discussion of
the philosophy of science.
And so today, we're going to take a look at Nietzsche's philosophy of science and the
great influence on his philosophy of science that he derives from Friedrich Albert Lange.
Now, philosophy of science is not something that Friedrich Nietzsche is usually associated
with.
It's not uncommon to encounter caricatures of Nietzsche as an irrationalist, or to see
the interpretations of his philosophy, which emphasize the postmodern aspects, the elements
of Nietzsche's thought that sort of emphasize the role of interpretation, or cleave to like
a pure perspectivism.
Now, of course, Nietzsche himself is somewhat responsible for that.
And so far as he writes of the problem of science, the problem of Socrates, the danger
that an excess of rational discursive intellect will pose, the danger that it will damage
life's beautiful illusions.
There are many variations on this type of presentation of Nietzsche, and I've given
this presentation of his ideas myself here.
And so that is to say, it's not wrong.
This kind of presentation of Nietzsche has its place.
But we must ask, does Nietzsche have a philosophy of science?
And what one finds, if they search for it in his work, is that indeed he does.
And perhaps the most interesting aspect of Nietzsche's philosophy of science is how it
developed and what it culminates in.
Because what we find when we take a closer look at this question of the Nietzschean philosophy
of science is that it is a secret beginning to Nietzsche's philosophizing.
That is, as Annie Anders and Carl Schlechter, who was in charge of the Nietzsche Archive
for many years, the two of them have called it, that the secret origins of Nietzsche first
thinking philosophically originate with his development of an understanding of the nature
of what science is, the point of science, and how science develops.
During his early days as a philologist, Nietzsche read and studied the pre-Socratic philosophers
or, as he called them, the pre-Platonics.
Figures like Anaximander, Heraclitus, Democritus, he also became familiar with philosophers
of science, including Neocontian figures, some of whom were scientists themselves, such
as Launga, Helmholtz, Von Baer, and others.
And finally, many of those that we count among the great philosophers today are scientists
as well.
It had important things to say about the philosophy of science, people like Leibniz and Spinoza,
Kant, even Schopenhauer.
Because of course, Nietzsche did not drop out of the ether.
He's not a unique figure with no precedent.
There are many things that are unique or peculiar to Nietzsche, but like all the other philosophers,
he's engaged in a dialogue with the ideas of past thinkers, and his entry to the dialogue
is in direct response to disputes within 19th century science, and about the philosophy
of science.
And so now you may think, what is the use in understanding 19th century science and
earlier views of science?
Like why familiarize ourselves with the ideas of Launga, or the theories of Spinoza, or
the mathematics of Poskovich, right?
These kinds of questions are why, I think, many of us avoid engaging with Nietzsche in
this way, right?
On the basis of what he thought about science and his philosophy of science, because inevitably
it seems outdated or irrelevant.
If you want to understand physics, pick up a modern physics textbook, right?
You don't go to Friedrich Nietzsche.
But in my view, understanding these things is very relevant, actually.
Let's take a step back and consider what we'd like to get out of this.
The questions we're entertaining now are not properly scientific, as we've said, but rather
meta-scientific, addressed to the questions of the philosophy of science, and so is the
goal of science to give us a true picture of the world.
Do insights gained through empirical data and the scientific method indicate anything
to us about the fundamental nature of the world?
If there are patterns and laws that govern reality, can we distill those patterns and
laws down to as few principles as possible, or is it possible to even have a single principle?
What is the relationship of science to metaphysics?
Does science require a metaphysics in order to pursue the truth?
In other words, if we have no theory of what the data from sense perceptions indicates,
no understanding of what an individual fact of reality corresponds to, you know, in the
grand totality of things, then do we really understand anything?
I might have a really sophisticated knowledge of the turning of the seasons, for example,
as many ancient people did, or even potentially people before the dawn of civilization.
But to what extent did they really have that much of a greater understanding of the world,
just by virtue of this fact, over somebody who didn't know of the turning of the seasons,
because it still contains so much personified things that they saw in nature and mythological
knowledge.
I mean, given that they didn't understand the turning of the seasons in context to be
a phenomenon caused by Earth's axial tilt of its orbit around the sun, right?
So is science just the pursuit of a bunch of disconnected facts, or is our ultimate goal
to correlate all these facts into a coherent understanding that counts for all of those
facts, right?
And it's difficult to say that discovering the true nature of reality, however you want
to describe what I just said there, it's difficult to say that that's the point of any one application
of the scientific method in the form of an experiment.
But if we don't ask the question of what we're doing when we do science generally, I think
we find ourselves in a very strange place where we have no logical understanding of
why we're pursuing what we're pursuing, even as we conduct the pursuit in itself and apparently
in a very logical manner.
And so these questions, I think that I've just laid out, there's all sorts of potential
answers.
I'm not suggesting by any means that they're impossible to answer, but simply that you're
not going to get the answer from the scientific method itself.
These are questions where you have to introduce an element of interpretation of where you
there's a point where you have to stop just looking at data and saying, well, this is
what the data says, and actually bring to bear your subjective interpretation, your
pattern recognizing software that your brain has given you and go out on a limb and say
what you think it is, right, or say what you think the answer to some of these questions
are.
Now, as we've said Nietzsche, he first comes to consider these questions through his engagement
with the pre-plotonic philosophers, the pre-plotonic philosophers hail from a time when the intellectuals
did not divide off the question of why we do science from science itself.
For them, the goal of constructing a metaphysical view of the world, a view based on first
principles, was deeply related to the project of constructing physical principles for understanding
the behavior of body and phenomena within the world.
Now, a word on terminology before we go further, I'm using Nietzsche's terms here, pre-plotonics
rather than pre-socratics.
The meaning of the term is simply the pre-socratics plus Socrates.
Now, why does Nietzsche call them a such?
Because in his view, Socrates has more in common with the other pre-socratics than he does
with Plato.
Plato is a systematizer, and he blends philosophical influence from multiple archetypes.
Because Socrates, like the other figures before Plato, are hemmed from a single stone, as Nietzsche
says, or hewed from a single stone, excuse me, so they come from a time before there were
formal systems of philosophy or any organized discipline defining what philosophy was.
Each had to define the type of the philosopher as his own innovation.
And so when I use the term pre-plotonic, we're talking about an era of philosophy as defined
by Nietzsche, before the philosophical system building and the blending of philosophical
styles and ideas that is found in the writings of Plato.
Now Nietzsche has a particular theory about who the pre-plotonics were, which he outlines
in his lectures on them, and my primary source for today is a book that has those lectures
with commentary translated by Gregory Whitlock.
And it's an indispensable resource for understanding the development of Nietzsche's thought, and
I highly recommend this book.
I'll be drawing in Whitlock's commentary as much as his translation, if not more so.
And so in any case, Nietzsche's theory when it comes to understanding the pre-plotonics
is that they were a series of Greek philosophers whose great insight, their collective project,
to speak, whether in conscious collaboration or not, was the innovation of materialism.
That Greek philosophy leading up to Plato represented the critique of mythological explanations
of the world breaking away from the supernatural view of reality, and an attempt to understand
reality that increasingly moved towards materialist explanations, physical laws governing reality.
This is important first because Nietzsche believes that this progression towards materialism
is cyclical.
While we see one example of it in the pre-plotonics, Nietzsche believes we can see the same pattern
in the European Enlightenment.
It's important to clarify, therefore, that what's repeating here is not the acquisition
of the exact same scientific knowledge.
I mean, that would be kind of an absurd claim.
It's given that the things that are learning and the technology available is different
in both cases.
But rather, it's a similar course of development of a worldview based on science, and what
that means exactly will become clear as we go on.
But Nietzsche doesn't believe, importantly, that this pattern is culturally specific to
the Greeks.
I think this would apply to us today, right?
Another reason why Nietzsche's argument may be relevant to us now is because he asserts
that the materialist understanding of the world is an inevitable consequence of philosophizing.
Furthermore, that the materialist understanding is both powerful and dangerous when it's taken
through to its ultimate conclusions.
Nietzsche asserts that the ultimate conclusion of a materialist philosophy, the goal or the
end of materialism as he sees it, is the forging of a single principle for understanding life
and understanding reality, from which all other equations and formulae can be derived,
from which the no longer disconnected facts of reality can be ordered, right?
This revolution and thought happened in fits and starts, as all revolutions do, and it
should be said that Nietzsche saw some figures as dead ends or regressions.
But nevertheless, he trots out a new chronology of the pre-plotonic philosophers, and he
gives a picture in which each figure takes a further step in coming up with that single
coherent principle for describing and explaining physical reality.
And so the way Nietzsche is thinking about this, we might notice, therefore may seem
to conflate science and philosophy, or you could even say it conflates science, philosophy,
and metaphysics, right?
They all become part of the same project.
And so are there problems that could arise from this kind of framing?
I mean, of course, right?
But this is the way that many of the pre-plotonics would have thought about these things.
All of these disciplines of thought are differentiated to us now.
But they are also part of this unified, overarching thing that we call the pursuit of truth.
And maybe a good faith way or a steelman way of trying to understand the argument for conflating
these things, for doing the opposite of what we like to do in philosophy, right?
Make distinctions.
Here's maybe my steelman argument for thinking in a less granular way, the way the pre-plotonics
would, that a scientific understanding without the explanatory framework found in metaphysics
or philosophy becomes just a senseless cluster of trivial facts.
That metaphysics without philosophy or science just falls into dogmatism, superstitious religious
views of the world.
And that philosophy done without a grounding in science or without a concern for its first
principles, it becomes just context specific idiomatic sayings or idle speculation, right?
And so while we now understand the many disciplines of academia with greater granularity these
days, and that's very useful and certainly an innovation, we should still understand
the sense in which if one cares about obtaining some kind of world picture that even remotely
approaches the truth, the concerns of science and philosophy have to become unified.
That's a view shared by Edward Zeller, who's a philologist and another prominent 19th century
figure who before Nietzsche was one of the most important writers in the topic of Greek
philosophy.
Zeller writes in his outlines of the history of philosophy published in 1883, quote, what
particularly distinguishes this oldest period of Greek philosophy is the complete fusion
of philosophy and science, end quote.
Some have considered Zeller to be a Hegelian.
Whitlock argues in his commentary that Zeller bears far more similarity to the other Neocontian
thinkers that influence Nietzsche than to the Hegelians, although he certainly did have
a Hegel influence.
And in fact we can see some intellectual kinship between the two men insofar as Zeller would
go on to quote from Nietzsche's own work.
Nietzsche often goes against Zeller in these lectures, but they also find agreement on
some points and where they align most is in their fundamental attitude towards the Greeks,
as both Zeller and Nietzsche held that the study of the Greek philosophers was valuable
in and of itself.
In contrast to the view that the Greeks should be understood as merely a prerequisite to
modern philosophical or scientific thinking, or that Greek philosophy is merely an early
stage, something inferior or half formed in comparison to our modern ideas, it's simply
a prelude.
That was the common historiographical approach to Greek philosophy.
It was seen as maybe a curiosity, but nothing more.
The view of the Contians was somewhat similar.
That philosophy is separate from the history of philosophy.
Learning about the Greeks is valuable to the history of philosophy, certainly, but it's
not philosophically valuable in and of itself to study the Greeks.
You might also consider another sort of the inverse that we might find, right, of people
who wouldn't say the Greeks are unimportant, but say the Greeks are very important because
we find all of our initial ideas there.
We might consider Nietzsche's own criticisms of classicists when approaching the Greeks,
when he outlines his arguments in Birth of Tragedy, that conversely, they saw great significance
to the Greeks, but they made the mistake insofar as they approached them only to project their
own values and their own beliefs and meanings onto the Greeks.
So that was happening a lot also.
The Hegelians, on the other hand, they do something that made possible a new understanding
of the history of thought, by in some sense unifying the history of philosophy with philosophy
itself.
After Hegel, ideas are not understood as originating purely out of logical deliberation
as Kant had imagined.
Hegel affects this historical turn in philosophy, and in the wake of him, there's this concept
that ideas emerge out of a dialectic, that there's not a decontextualized, pure origin
of truth out of the lap of being.
Truth is a process, and therefore the Greeks must be understood as part of that process.
So we're getting somewhere, but nevertheless the Hegelians still tended to hold that the
Greeks were a preliminary stage, right?
Everything in history has merely been leading up to Hegel's conception of the absolute.
Philosophy and the history of philosophy are unified, yes, but there is still a progression,
upon which a Gaelian philosophy is farther along than Greek philosophy.
And so Hegel gives the Greeks far more credit, but still ultimately interprets Greek philosophy
according to his own philosophical ideas.
The difference in how Nietzsche approaches the pre-Platonics and Greek philosophy in
general is informed by the influence on his thought of the Neocontians.
The relationship between Kant and the Neocontians is very fascinating, but it's a bit complicated,
it takes a little off the path.
So the key aspect is that the Neocontians share in common with Nietzsche on this issue
The fact that they dared to look at the Greeks with an eye for what the Greeks could teach us,
not to see them as naive and less intelligent, or a mere curiosity, mere freaks of thought,
as Hegel said, past historiographers had looked at the Greeks, and not to project their own
ideas onto them, not as a preliminary stage, but as something complete in itself.
Many among the Neocontian philosophers of science look to the Greeks as themselves being
instructive and unique in possessing their own distinctive character.
And so Whitlock writes in his commentary,
Operating in stark contrast to the dominant, self-projective methods of these schools,
Nietzsche sought to learn something of the Greeks for their own sake.
He did this not because the Greeks could aid modern humanity with quaint phrases, or because
the Greeks were a necessary stage of Hegelian spirit, or because they discovered the idea
of beauty.
No, Nietzsche sought to learn of the Greeks for the value of the knowledge itself because
the Greeks were themselves fascinating and insightful.
He was careful to discover what dialectic actually employed the Greek drive to philosophy.
This dialectic is indeed one of natural science, but science has understood differently than
by either Kant or Hegel.
The reason why the Neocontians provided an ingredient that helped Nietzsche along in
moving beyond what we might call the view of Kant himself, or the Paleo-Contian view,
It's found in the fact that Friedrich Uberweg and Friedrich Albert Lange, both Neocontians,
they wrote books interpreting Greek philosophers as being materialists, and they were themselves
materialists, right?
And so they suggested that the Greeks discovered things in their pursuit of understanding the
material world that can be instructive to us still today.
Zeller, a figure that, again, has one foot in Hegelianism and another foot in Neocontianism,
he gives a great explication of this attitude, quoting from the same text as before, he writes,
The systems built up by the Greek philosophers are not to be regarded merely as a preparation
for modern philosophy.
They have a value in themselves alone as an achievement in the development of man's intellectual
life.
It was the Greeks who won for man freedom and independence of philosophic thought, who
proclaimed the autonomy of reason and gave it a two-fold application.
Wisdom in the Greek sense included not only a theoretical explanation of the world, but
also a definite practical attitude to life.
Thus, apart from independence of scientific thought, it was the freedom to live life as
he pleased, autarchy, that distinguished the Greek wise man, end quote.
Or if we want to look to somebody who is more purely Neocontian, we could look to Friedrich
Albert Lange's statements in his monumental work, History of Materialism, which is really
a central work for Nietzsche.
It's a work whose importance pervades all of Nietzsche's thought.
Nietzsche writes, quote, with the freedom and boldness of the Hellenic mind was united
and innate ability to draw inferences, to enunciate clearly and sharply general propositions,
to hold firmly and surely to the premises of an inquiry, and to arrange the results
clearly and luminously, in a word, the gift of scientific deduction, end quote.
Now, I could see an objection here, you know, insofar as Lange, Ubreweg and the other Neocontians
saw the Greeks as valuable, you know, they're the first ones daring to liberate philosophical
thought from superstition, allowing the advent of materialism, right?
And yet, these people who were saying this are themselves materialists, which means we're
looking back the pre-plotonics and we're saying, oh, they're just like me, right?
So couldn't we accuse them of doing what Nietzsche criticized the classicists for doing?
Simply projecting their own views onto the subject of their research.
And further, might we not say the same of Nietzsche?
Because he gets many of his own ideas, he says, originate in these figures.
So Whitlock writes, quote, Nietzsche too projects himself onto the Greeks, seeing them as discoverers
of the will to power and of the eternal return of the same.
Their struggle is one of materialism, precipitating an unconscious slide over many centuries into
the abyss of nihilism, end quote.
And so, while we inarguably see the first seeds of Nietzsche's philosophy in his study
of the pre-plotonics, we have to ask whether he genuinely discovered something from them,
that he then brought into the present through his writings, or whether he simply projected
onto them.
And we could ask the same of Lange and Uberweg.
But suffice to say, I think this question is unanswerable, right?
So whether these seeds of the ideas came from the Greeks or were merely projected onto them,
it's only through Nietzsche's engagement with these figures that these ideas gestated.
It's through the interaction of his mind with the Greeks that these ideas emerged.
And in the, you know, it's a simple fact, before him no one else had found these ideas
as clearly, put them as clearly, as powerfully, as forcefully as Nietzsche did.
And so in some sense, we can set that issue aside as to whether Nietzsche was actually
engaging with the Greeks in a truly original way or not, that transcended the limitations
of these other schools.
But by understanding the dialogue and the evolution of how philosophers tended to look
at the Greeks, we can better understand where Nietzsche saw himself entering this dialogue,
this dialogue that was now running for centuries.
And now we understand the question being asked, how long we approach the philosophers of antiquity?
What is the nature of their significance?
Nietzsche answers these questions following in the thought of neocontians such as Lange,
that the pre-Platonics charted a course forward into materialism as we've described.
And Nietzsche argues that materialist philosophy is a kind of prerequisite scientific experimentation,
at least as a methodological presupposition.
And I think there's a good argument for that, that whether or not you fully accept like a
purely materialistic view of the world, it's almost a prerequisite methodological assumption
to go gather empirical data.
And so thus training ourselves to think materialistically is required for science.
And so Nietzsche believes that scientific thinking must arrive hand in hand with philosophy
itself.
And the conclusion therefore is that the advent of the activity of philosophizing and the philosopher
as a specific type among other types in society necessarily arises mutually with materialism.
This doesn't mean you get philosophers, you know, some guy identifies himself as a philosopher
and suddenly your whole society is materialistic overnight.
It means that the tendency and the capacity to think in materialistic terms as a presupposition
necessary for the scientific method.
It begins to emerge and it does so with greater and greater force over time as the power of
science becomes revealed to a culture.
Longa provides the basis for this idea in a section from history of materialism as follows.
Quote,
Materialism is as old as philosophy, but not older.
The physical conception of nature, which dominates the earliest periods of the history of thought
remained ever entangled in the contradictions of dualism and the fantasies of personification.
The first attempts to escape from these contradictions, to conceive the world as a unity and to rise
above the vulgar errors of the senses leads directly into the sphere of philosophy.
And amongst these first attempts, materialism has its place.
End quote.
So there is a logic to conflating these things, the emergence of philosophy with the emergence
of science and the emergence of materialism.
We tend to think that some form of advanced, you know, scientific, materialist mindset
that that's a type of ideology specific to modernity.
But Longa and Nietzsche would both oppose that view.
Longa emerges as a form of wisdom, which is critical of religion and which then pursues
truth outside of revelatory knowledge, you know, outside of, you know, in ancient Greece,
it would have been like, irracular wisdom and the superstitions of the mystery cults.
It attempts to systematize and make things clear, you know, not vague or mystical and
not like the disconnected, fragmentary, aphoristic wisdom, right, of people like the sages of
old.
And where this inevitably leads is for philosophy to question explanations of the world, which
have to venture outside of what we can understand or observe by personifying nature or seeing
the work of gods or spirits behind the phenomenal world.
The more that the light of reason is applied, the more these avenues from explaining the
material world in terms of a supernatural world, the more those are cut off.
And the completion of this process is to explain the material world purely in terms of the
activities and processes that we can perceive and measure.
The final or ultimate end of that project is to produce a unified understanding of the
world within those terms.
And that's sort of the story of the pre-Platonics as Nietzsche sees it.
And here we see how another influence underlying all this, which I haven't mentioned.
There's a very big influence in Nietzsche's life that comes into the story here to provide
a unique twist to his approach.
And that is he brings in that opponent of Hegel as an influence on his thought.
And that is Schopenhauer.
Arthur Schopenhauer is the great philosopher of the will.
As a contemporary of Hegel's, he raged against Hegelian philosophy.
That Hegel had taken cons great insights into a completely unproductive direction.
Nevertheless, Nietzsche's use of Schopenhauer is not so much to bludgeon the Hegelian view
of history.
Rather, Nietzsche builds on the Hegelian as much as anyone else did in the wake of Hegel.
Hegel was so ubiquitous in his influence that fighting against Hegel would have been a bit
foolish in some sense, and that isn't what Nietzsche does.
Instead, he picks up on something within Schopenhauer, within his ideas that helps us to give a coherent
narrative as to how all this works, what the Greeks were doing, and why this phenomenon
of the philosopher arises, and why it exists in a culture, and what it's driving towards.
That is, by drawing on the concept of a single will underlying everything.
So you might wonder why is drawing upon or explaining the concept of a will that's driving
philosophy even necessary?
Nietzsche has a pretty good argument for this, and this argument is that there is no obvious
need for a civilization to develop philosophy.
It's wonderful.
I love when Nietzsche points things out like this because he's, I mean at this point in
his career, he's not exactly a philosopher.
He's still a philologist, albeit philosophically curious, we might say, but not too many academics
at that time would have questioned the validity or the usefulness of doing philosophy.
That's sort of the heart and soul of the university, the most important among the faculties.
But Nietzsche says there's no obvious need for it, and that in fact we actually have
counterfactual examples.
So Nietzsche writes, and this is in the introduction to the pre-plotonic lectures, quote, the question
is attractive enough.
How did the Greeks philosophize during the richest and most luxuriant period of their
power?
Or more principled, did they philosophize in this period?
The answer will decisively clarify the Hellenic character for us.
In itself, philosophy is of course necessary neither for one human being nor for a people.
The Romans, as long as they grew only from within, are entirely unphilosophical.
It depends on the deepest roots of an individual and of a people, whether he philosophizes
or not.
It concerns whether he has such an excess of intellect that he no longer directs it
only for personal, individual purposes, but rather with it arrives at a pure intuition.
The Romans are not artists, for the same reason they are not philosophers, end quote.
So the Romans, unphilosophical people, as he says, but so long as they only grew from
within.
What he means by that is that Rome received religions and philosophies from the many places
it traded with and conquered and incorporated into the empire.
But Rome didn't have a homegrown philosophy, it didn't have a homegrown class of philosophers.
You look through Roman history, the best you can do is maybe someone like Cicero, but Cicero
is a philosopher of law and government, this pragmatic forms of philosophy.
And whenever he gets in anything deeper, like ethics, he's almost totally dependent
on the Greeks for his ideas.
And so the Romans themselves, they're an intensely practical people, and their thought
was, accordingly, unartistic, unself-reflective, self-assured, martial discipline.
And then on the other hand, the Greeks do produce philosophers during the height of
their power as a civilization, and interestingly Nietzsche makes an etymological analysis of
the term wise in ancient Greek, which is the term that would have been used for the
type of person that philosophized.
And in Greek, it means something akin to useless.
This does not apply to all knowledge, but specifically to the type of knowledge of the
philosopher.
The philosopher's knowledge is not the knowledge of an art or a craft, something which produces
value or utility.
Rather, the philosopher has useless knowledge.
That's what it means to call him wise.
In other words, being wise is itself a luxury.
It doesn't have practical utility.
It doesn't have value in the sense that a, certainly not that a Homo economicus would
understand, and maybe it has even less so in the martial world of ancient Rome.
To be wise is the privilege of those who have leisure time and who can spend their energies
in their efforts in directions that go beyond mere survival or day-to-day existence.
Whitlock elaborates on this in his commentary.
He speaks of the first philosopher Thales as an example here, and I'm quoting in an
upridged form, quote,
What Thales knew surely seemed useless to the ordinary Greek.
The adjective wise connotes useless, luxurious, or superabundant intellect, which Nietzsche
will later connect to the Greek notion of noose.
Designating a person wise, connoted to the ordinary language user, a knowledge of a field
such as astrology, shamanism, or alchemy.
To such a person, Thales would have been indistinguishable from other uselessly knowledgeable people.
Such fine distinctions between astrologers and the rest would have collapsed into the
adjective wise.
To the ordinary language user, such thought is a luxury requiring superabundance of time,
wealth, or intellect, noose, and consequently, tied to an alien reality, end quote.
And so we have a counterfactual.
During the flourishing of their power, Rome didn't need philosophers, which means philosophers
are not a necessary factor to an ascending civilization.
But the Greeks did produce philosophers, and so that presses the question as to why,
which becomes all the more pressing, when their term for what philosophical wisdom indicates
is that it's useless, and thus in some way unnecessary.
So I would say at that point, it raises a question about what is it that drives the
will to philosophize.
And it reveals something about the Greeks themselves when we follow this inquiry.
The Greeks teach us something insofar as they demonstrate to us an example of a culture
that produced geniuses who all drive toward an encapsulation of the world within these
principles of reason, and as Zeller says, doing so with the goal of clear enunciation
of the principles of reason.
And so this brings us back to some of the initial questions I raised.
What is the point of science?
What are we doing in pursuing scientific truth?
And does science require a philosophy of science, or a metaphysics, and so on and so forth?
Schopenhauer is the final ingredient in understanding the pre-plotonic specifically, and science
generally within Nietzsche's new framework.
Nietzsche can come at this question of why a culture would produce something ostensibly
useless like the philosopher, but now with the understanding of the emergence of science
and philosophy as driven by an underlying will.
And the final object of that will is the encapsulation of the world in a single principle, the explanation
of the material through the material world itself.
That's the ultimate object of the intellect's desire as it seeks to liberate itself, liberate
itself from dogma and from mythology, and leap from specialized, scattered, or disconnected
knowledge into some sort of constellated, coherent world picture.
Should be noted, will to power is not a fully formed idea at this point yet.
Nietzsche hasn't even coined the term, really, but he has a head start because Schopenhauer
has already provided the idea of the will as the inner character of all being.
Schopenhauer also gives us an understanding of the various phenomena of the world as gradations
of the will's self-manifestations.
So he has this working picture of the will to go on as a sort of provisional explanation.
Nietzsche says something in these lectures, then, that shows a prefiguration of his will
to power idea, and the idea that the pursuit of truth or the pursuit of scientific knowledge
is a rarefied form of a more fundamental drive or of a more fundamental will.
The intellect must not only desire surreptitious delights, it must become completely free
and celebrate Saturnalia.
The liberated spirit surveys things, and now, for the first time, mundane existence appears
to him worthy of contemplation as a problem.
This is the true characteristic of the philosophical drive, wonderment at that which lies before
everyone.
The most mundane phenomenon is becoming.
With it, Ionian philosophy begins.
So, when he says the intellect must become free and celebrate Saturnalia, that is, of
course, the Roman holiday, where the slave gets to play the master for the day and the
masters serve the slaves, so everything is reversed, right?
The slave is a free man, though, is the thing that he's invoking here.
And so, taking joy in understanding the most mundane phenomenon, that's the beginning
of philosophy and the beginning of science.
From this perspective, we can see how an appeal to will, Schopenhauer's will, to explain
the drive to science makes sense.
It's the desire for freedom of the intellect from all constraint.
That of course leads the intellect to seek dominion over all the world because that's
the only way to be free of all the world's many constraints.
And by this token, all the world becomes interesting.
Even the smallest, simplest, inanimate things become phenomena to be understood.
Every object offers a potential explanation about some part of reality.
And so, we have the understanding of what this drive towards the scientific mindset
is, taking joy in expanding the intellect's energy to understand everything, even the
smallest things.
So now, we're going to look at the interpretations of the pre-plotonic figures as they appear
within these lectures, Nietzsche's interpretations of them.
And through this understanding of Nietzsche's view of the emergence of scientific materialism
in ancient Greece, we get an insight into, or further insight into the secret beginnings
of his philosophy.
So the first pre-plotonic philosopher is Thales.
And Thales is sort of the traditional first among the philosophers.
And that always presents a problem.
Nietzsche acknowledges this in his lectures.
He says, anytime we say that this was the first one, he says, this is almost always
like a sort of, it's a falsification, it's an oversimplification of reality.
The way he deals with that question, actually, is very interesting.
But even though philosophy existed in some inchoate, unorganized form, Nietzsche says
that the real question is not when philosophy arose, but when philosophers arose, he shifts
the question in that way.
He's not asking, well, when did a formal discipline such as philosophy become codified, or when
did people first think philosophically, right?
Because how could you answer those questions?
But rather, when did the first person arise who appears as an entirely different kind
of figure from the ones who came before?
And when did that first figure arise who was definitively a philosopher and not classified
under something else?
He evaluates Thales as the first philosopher on that basis.
And even though there could still be arguments either way that Thales could sort of fade
into the background of all the other sages, Nietzsche thinks he's got a pretty good argument
as to why Thales is the first.
So to talk about Thales, he asserts that water is the fundamental element of all matter.
All matter as we experience it, while it may be configured in a certain way as to be organic,
or metallic, or wood, or fire, or air.
Thales says it's all in its most fundamental, most basic form, water.
It's also worth noting that Thales is also a scientist.
He's noted for making a discovery having to do with eclipses.
He was a mathematician as well.
Nietzsche believes that Thales has overcome the previous preludes to the philosophical
approach to life, the areas where maybe philosophy was sort of practiced in various scattered
forms, but he overcomes all of this and steps forward as the first philosopher.
Why?
Well, Nietzsche says he's the first because he overcomes three things, which Nietzsche
lists, and he overcomes them all at once.
First, the preliminary, sporadic era of philosophy.
These are the sages who spoke in aphorisms and sayings, but created no system.
Second, the oracular, revelatory precursor to philosophy that's found in religion.
And third, the various sciences.
Thales overcomes these by positing his theory that everything is water.
That explanation of this might seem a bit bizarre, but we'll look to Whitlock's commentary
once more.
Nietzsche's strange claim that Thales overcame the various sciences, strange because even
if Greek thought is science, it had not specialized into various sciences, it becomes clear when
we realize that Nietzsche saw in Thales the drive or will to reduce the world to as few
laws as possible, and Thales assertion that all is water speaks from such a will, however
rudimentarily.
And further in the commentary, it's actually some pages later, Whitlock elaborates further,
quote, Thales goes beyond mythic thought, use of sporadic proverbs, and even individual
scientific pursuits to arrive at a multi-scientific understanding.
His interests went beyond this or that physical phenomenon to the will to comprehend all physical
phenomena end quote.
So there we have it, the beginning of philosophy in Nietzsche's view, the first philosopher
of the West, Thales.
He represents to Nietzsche not just a philosopher, but a figure containing within him the entire
story of the scientific drive, the entire impetus for the materialist project.
He's the manifestation of this will to comprehend the entire physical world, the will to render
the world into as few laws as possible.
And of course, the fewest possible number of laws would be what would be one law, right?
But we'll get there.
Anyway, we can see the direct influence again on Nietzsche's thought from Friedrich Albert
Longa, who also describes Thales as a materialist.
And so this is from the history of materialism, quote.
Materialism only becomes a complete system when matter is conceived as purely material.
That is, when its constituent particles are not a sort of thinking matter, but physical
bodies, which are moved in obedience to merely physical principles, and being in themselves
without sensations, produce sensations in thought by particular forms of their combinations.
And thorough going materialism seems always necessarily to be atomism.
And so again, the animated magnet of Thales harmonizes exactly with the expression, all
things are full of gods, and yet is at bottom clearly to be distinguished from the way in
which atomists attempt to explain the attraction of iron by the magnet, end quote.
And so very important things in this quote here, Longa is not only setting up what sort
of the litmus test for how materialist your system is, which is very important, but he
talks about the animated magnet.
That's a reference to the idea that Thales said the magnet has a soul, right?
The soul in human beings is how we account for humans ability to affect our own environment,
right?
To, or to, to affect movement, to move around, not simply be affected.
We're animate, we're not inanimate, right?
So the soul, we, that must be the thing that creates movement in his view, and thus the
magnet must have a soul because the magnet moves iron.
So obviously, you know, Thales is the first burst of materialist thought.
He's not the completion of the project by any means.
But we see the nature of this tendency, the underlying will.
His position naturally creates problems, however, or confusions, which become questions for
further figures to solve.
And so we'll see this play out again and again with this sort of dialectic that emerges.
Each of these parallels between Thales and three other figures who emerged in the European
Enlightenment.
First, he compares Thales to Paracelsus, who was an alchemist, a scientist, and a philosopher
of the 1500s, and who had his own theory concerning the transformation of water.
You know, Paracelsus, through his work in chemistry, he came to believe that water was
the fundamental form of matter.
Water for Paracelsus is associated with the feminine.
So we see some like, you know, alchemical ideas in there.
It's the necessary condition for all flora, you know, all plant life, all organic matter,
alcoholic spirits, oil based substances, alkali, you know, and so on and so forth.
And so that's why he would draw the conclusion that water is so fundamental.
The reason why Nietzsche makes this comparison is for the same fact that Paracelsus was definitely
pursuing a scientific theory, which was materialist in character, or at least somewhat, driving
towards materialism, we'll say.
And furthermore, it was roughly analogous to the same hypothesis that Thales makes.
And so this helps Nietzsche to establish the case that what Thales was doing can be classified
as scientific in the same way.
You know, another point of comparison is Antoine Lavossier, a French chemist who lived in the
18th century, and Lavossier had done experiments by which he'd attempted to boil water for
a prolonged period to see if it created sediment or, you know, became solid, trying to demonstrate
that you could transmute an element, change it from water to earth, which was a form of
struggle against the Aristotelian dogma.
Whitlock helps explain why it's necessary for Nietzsche to therefore make the above
two comparisons.
Quote, this lecture on Thales does not simple-mindedly conflate him with Paracelsus or Lavossier.
Nietzsche suggests that the continuing tenability in modern times of theories like theirs lends
validity to interpreting Thales' fragments as scientific notions.
End quote.
The third point of comparison Nietzsche makes here is he compares Thales to the Kant-Liplas
hypothesis.
Nietzsche writes, quote, Thales sought a material less solid and properly capable of formation.
He begins along a path that the Ionian philosophers follow after him.
Actually, astronomical facts justify his belief that a less solid aggregate condition must
have given rise to current circumstances.
Here we should recall the Kant-Liplas hypothesis concerning a gaseous precondition of the universe.
In following the same direction, the Ionian philosophers were certainly on the right path.
To conceive the entirety of such a multiferous universe as merely formal differentiation
of one fundamental material belongs to an inconceivable freedom in boldness.
This is a service of such a magnitude that no one may aspire to it a second time.
End quote.
So he uses the same language there describing the Greeks in terms of freedom and boldness.
And the Kant-Liplas hypothesis, which Kant in some sense makes reference to in the quote
that we started the episode with, it's the idea of a gaseous initial state to the universe.
It's an apparent chaos which is transformed by physical laws over time into some more
complex state as we, you know, the state that it's in as we observe it today, which means
you're starting from one form of matter and then through physical forces you get many
forms.
So Kant is, he's positing a fundamental form of material which acts in a certain way such
that as a necessary result you get all the conditions we see.
So again Nietzsche is not saying that Thales and the Kant-Liplas hypothesis are the same
thing.
He's saying that the same road that Thales is traveling is found in the idea of a gaseous
precondition to the universe, i.e. that we begin with matter all the same form and it
changes an accord with the laws of nature, right?
Or we get the situation we're in today as Kant says, you know, give me matter and I
shall construct a world out of it.
The next significant figure, actually more significant than Thales is Anak Simondar.
Anak Simondar takes things further.
He still attempts to hypothesize about the nature of being, but not by proposing another
qualitative thing at the base of all reality as Thales does, you know, something definitive
like water.
Anak Simondar posits a principle that exists prior to any of the elements, including water.
You know, I think he still says water is the most fundamental of them, but before that
he says there's warmth and cold.
These two forces are more fundamental than water and when mixed together they produce
water.
You know, it's the semen of the world that gives rise to all the other elements.
But so far that's just a small advancement on what Thales had said.
Anak Simondar's main contribution is that he then takes it a step further than that
and says this eternal flux of warmth and cold is not itself the most fundamental thing.
Even that arises from something else, from something that's still more fundamental, which
is called the indefinite.
That's how Nietzsche insists on translating it.
The indefinite is this ultimate unity, Anak Simondar's first principle of nature, quoting
here from Whitlock in an abridged form, quote, as Nietzsche argues, the cosmic significance
of the indefinite is not as a grand collection of all qualities into infinity.
Its importance lies in the fact that it alone has no qualities at all.
In contrast to the watery universal flux with its countless qualities, the indefinite
is quality-less matter, the substratum to all predicates, but not itself a predicate
or predicated, end quote.
Nietzsche's argument is that the advancement here is moving from a type of fundamental
matter with a certain quality to the idea of the quality-less.
And again, we're operating within this framework that blends or fails to separate philosophy
and science, and so really, we can say that Anak Simondar is the first philosopher-depositor
thing in itself.
That's what his indefinite really is.
By definition, it has no definite qualities.
It's a fundamental form of reality that we can acknowledge but not describe, because
anything describable becomes split off from the indefinite.
It's an important point in the history of philosophy, also because Anak Simondar brings
a moral dimension into this.
His world picture, his attempt to bound the boundless within a single law, or the smallest
set of principles, has moral implications, insofar as he explains this reality of temporal
things with definite qualities, which are constantly arising and passing away, by asserting
that every phenomenon owes a debt to the indefinite for its individuated existence.
So, we're living in this world where everything's arising and passing away, and then someone
comes along and says, the fundamental reality is this indefinite thing, which never arises
or passes away.
How do you get from A to B?
The question is, why is reality in this way that seems so fundamentally opposed to the
way you're describing what you say the fundamental reality is?
You need to answer a theodicy to some extent.
Theodicy is the wrong word.
He says, Anak Simondar, that everything from people to rocks to trees to planets, even
the more fundamental elements or patterns.
All of these things steal their existence from the indefinite, and that means that our
existence within this dynamic change, this becoming, as we called it, our very lives
are a form of injustice, and that injustice is remedied when we're returned to the indefinite
at the end of things.
As for what all this has to do with the development of a scientific or materialist philosophy,
BitLock gives another excellent explanation, I must say.
Quote, by introducing the indefinite into natural philosophy, Anak Simondar raised the
crucial philosophical issue of time.
The indefinite itself is timeless.
As ungenerated and indestructible, it is outside time altogether.
For each individual world, or monad, time begins only when it breaks off from the indefinite,
and ends only with its own destruction.
Each individual world is its own monadic measurement of time.
With a succession of worlds, time begins anew again and again.
Likewise, within one successive world, each individual measures time according to its
own monadic existence.
Time begins and ends for each existent thing with its own beginning and end.
The larger universe undergoes time in a similar monadic fashion.
Microcosm and macrocosm are time monads.
Only the indefinite is temporally indefinite.
Nietzsche calls this Anak Simandrian time monadism, a view of the world worthy of serious consideration.
This time monadism view is very similar to a fragment of an essay that Nietzsche wrote
in 1873 called the Time Atomism Fragment, which is something I plan to cover someday,
although getting too deeply into this topic now may derail this talk and take us too far
off the path of examining materialism.
But while this type of thought from Anak Simondar is awfully metaphysical in comparison to the
way we regard scientific thought today, again, I think Nietzsche is correct to perceive.
It was an attempt to hypothesize about the nature of time, which is a physics question
as much as a metaphysical one.
And that perhaps we should notice relative to his era that Anak Simondar is not talking
about time by invoking Zeus or Kronos, he's conceiving of time in a non-anthropomorphic
way and in a way that makes time a force which is impersonal and emotionless.
This is in stark contrast to the Greek picture of the gods, and so this is another thing
clawed away from the vague and cloudy explanations of mythology and brought into the light of
reason.
And furthermore, this type of theorizing helps open up new avenues of questions, once again,
for future figures to come along and answer.
How can things with qualities arise from something which itself has no qualities?
Is there a force that governs the rules of what is generated?
Would not this force be something above and beyond the indefinite itself?
If it's in the fundamental nature of the indefinite to generate things, wouldn't this nature of
generation therefore be a quality, thus making it something definite, something that we can
define by the fact that it generates, right?
And so these are all sorts of the things that come up in the dialectic.
Now in this accession of or the chronology of pre-platonics, we're going to skip Anaximonies,
who Nietzsche sees as sort of a minor figure.
We're also going to skip Gasp, Pythagoras, because as Nietzsche argues, Pythagoras is
really a cult leader and a superstitious religious figure.
And that might seem surprising to say, given that the Pythagoreans were seen as scientific
innovators, you know, they're mathematical atomists and so on.
So shouldn't they be, you know, fit right in?
And the later Pythagoreans do, but Nietzsche has an argument about this, which was novel
for his time, but I think is widely accepted now, where he drew on the work of his friend
Erwin Road, another philologist, to argue that the Pythagoreans came later than Pythagoras.
And that Pythagoras, he's a very interesting figure in terms of his personality and in
terms of the archetype he represents, but that he ultimately is very different from
the Pythagoreans who came later.
And Nietzsche treats them entirely separately.
And Pythagoras therefore ends up being, he's very important because he's archetypal as
this like mystical, regal, law dispensing figure, you know, he's got this cult of personality
and Nietzsche sees the persona of Pythagoras as an aspect of Plato's personality.
He's one of the three archetypes that sort of Plato blends together.
And so that's not that Pythagoras is overall an important, but for understanding the development
of materialism in ancient Greece, he's not really a important figure.
Another thing that Nietzsche is very concerned with in this whole thing, I should say, which
maybe I'm not getting across, it's also partly why I'm reading more of the commentary than
the translation itself, because the translation of the lectures is very interesting.
But Nietzsche is very concerned in these lectures with establishing the chronology
of the preplotonic figures, which it makes sense because it's key to proving that his
narrative is correct, his narrative of how philosophy arose hand in hand with materialism.
But since this is sort of an esoteric debate that, you know, is taking place within among
classical philologists, right, we're not going to spend any time talking about his chronological
arguments here.
We'll leave that to the philologists and we'll just take Nietzsche's arguments for granted
on that front.
Moving on, we come to Heraclitus.
Heraclitus is of central importance to Nietzsche.
We did a whole episode just on Heraclitus.
That's all the way back in episode five.
And we also covered some of the material from this episode in order to contextualize Heraclitus
there.
So if you do go back and listen to that one, you haven't heard it, you might hear some
of the same points covered.
But we have to now include Heraclitus in this examination of the pre-Platonics for a different
reason because he's part of this descent into materialism.
And so here we see a new development on this idea of finding a means of describing the
fundamental nature of reality, and it ties in with these considerations about time which
Nietzsche has brought up in Annex Cemetery.
Well, Heraclitus is often contrasted with Thales, the guy who said everything was fire,
whereas Thales said everything was water.
This is almost painfully oversimplified.
By the time we get to Heraclitus, fire is more like a metaphor for something which is,
in some sense, indescribable because we're talking about the nature of being itself,
right?
So you have to draw on these metaphors.
But Nietzsche says that Heraclitus is significant because he rejects being.
There is nothing of which we can say it is.
Duration is an illusion.
Rejecting Annex Cemetery's idea that injustice is done by things coming into being and that
the injustice is remedied when they pass away, Heraclitus says on the contrary, strife is justice.
Rather than Annex Cemetery's indefinite, which is a separate thing from all the individual
monads experiencing time and separate existence, the thing in itself for Heraclitus is the
world of becoming in which we all live.
Arising and passing away is the definite quality of existence.
The nature of reality is revealed in how things arise and pass away, rather than concealed
by that fact.
We don't hide a timeless reality behind things, but rather this world of absolute impermanence
is itself the ultimate reality, that's the Heraclitian view.
And so there is a definite quality, which is change.
Change is eternal and all-encompassing.
The scientific associations that Nietzsche draws here with Heraclitus are incredibly fascinating.
He invokes a thought experiment of Carl von Beyer concerning pulse rates, and he references
the thoughts of von Helmholtz on cosmic timescales also.
I'm going to go into the lecture and read a rather long section of this lecture on Heraclitus
that is about von Beyer, because I think the only way for the full implications of what
Nietzsche is saying to come through is to hear the whole thought experiment as he lays
it out.
And so, quote,
Well then, since for example the pulse rate among rabbits is four times faster than that
among cattle, these will also experience four times as much in the same period, and will
be able to carry out four times as many acts of will as cattle, thus in general experiencing
four times as much.
The inner life of various animal species, including humans, proceeds through the same
astronomical time space at different specific rates, and it is according to these that they
subjectively and variously judge the fundamental standard of time.
For this reason alone, only because for us this fundamental standard is small, does an
organic individual, a plant or an animal, appear to us as something remaining at one
size and in one shape.
For we could observe it one hundred times, or more, in a minute without noticing any
external alterations.
Well then, we think it very important whether pulse rate, rate of sensation, and the human
intellectual process either decelerate or accelerate, since in this way they are fundamentally
altered.
Assuming that the course of human life, with childhood, maturity, and old age, were reduced
by a factor of one one thousandth to one month.
When that pulse rate were accelerated one thousand times faster, then we would be able
to follow a flying bullet very easily with our vision.
If this lifetime were reduced once more by a factor of one one thousandth, limited to
some forty minutes, then we would consider the grass and flowers to be something just
as absolute and persistent as we now consider the mountains.
We would perceive in the growth of a bud as much and as little as a lifetime, like when
we think of the geological periods of the earth.
We would be totally unable to observe the voluntary movements of animals, for they would
be far too slow.
At best we could conceive of them as we, in our time frame, think of the heavenly bodies.
And with a still further reduction of a lifetime to a scale of one one billionth, the light
that we now see would perhaps become audible.
Our sounds would become inaudible.
When on the other hand, we enormously lengthen and expand a human lifetime, we get quite
another picture.
Reduce for example pulse rate and sensation threshold by one one thousandth and then our
life would last at the upper end eighty thousand years.
Then we would experience as much in one year as we do now in eight to nine hours.
Then every four hours we would watch winter melts away, the earth thaw out, grass and
flowers spring up, trees come into full bloom and bear fruit, and then all vegetation wilt
once more.
Many developments would not be observed by us at all because of their speed.
For example, a mushroom would suddenly sprout up like a fountain.
Day and night would alternate like light and shadows in but a moment, and the sun would
race along the arch of the heavens in the greatest hurry.
Were we to decelerate this lifetime already reduced a thousandfold once again to a scale
of one one millionth, a human being would be capable of making only one hundred and eighty
nine perceptions in an earth year.
The difference between day and night would entirely vanish.
The solar ecliptic would appear as a luminous bow across the sky as a glowing coal when
swung in a circle appears to form a circle of fire, and vegetation would continually
shoot up and vanish in great haste.
Enough then.
Every shape appearing to us as persistent would vanish in the super haste of events and would
be devoured by the wild storm of becoming.
Whatever remains, the unmoving proves to be a complete illusion, the result of our human
intellect."
And so, while Heraclitus philosophizes in such a scattered aphoristic form in which there
are so many interpretations and so many ways in which his ideas can be thought of as merely
poetic or something like that, Nietzsche sees in Heraclitus' ideas the potential for
a new way of thinking about duration, of bringing perspectivism to bear upon the concept
of duration and what that does to our cold concept of time.
Nietzsche is influenced in this by the Neocontians again and by Schopenhauer, and so far as
both of those camps tended to regard time as part of our representation of the world
rather than something innate to the thing in itself.
In other words, time is something we experience within our little monad of willing, wherein
our intellect represents existence to us.
But time is part of the representation.
It exists at the intersection of our intellect and reality as such.
Time in our experience of it is infinitely divisible, as Nietzsche is doing there.
Time is infinitely dividing.
And as such, our understanding of what time is can't really be separated from our perception
of it.
Like talking about time outside of the perception of time is a bit difficult.
I mean, we can describe it mathematically, of course, but it becomes very difficult to
conceive to imagine what we're talking about, right?
And so Lange had the following to say about Heraclitus, in which we can see the influence
on Nietzsche insofar as Heraclitus fitting into the development of materialism.
Quote, the boundless of Annex Cyminder, from which everything precedes, the divine primitive
fire of Heraclitus, into which the changing world returns to proceed from it anew, are
incarnations of persistent matter," end quote.
So use the term boundless there, but he means the indefinite or the apron of Annex Cyminder.
So Heraclitus' philosophy, it begins by invoking natural law, the logos.
Heraclitus says there's a definite governing quality, a law according to which reality behaves
or nature behaves.
And in logos, we have some element of intelligence within the essence of the natural world, some
quality that, you know, perhaps reminds us of Thales placing a soul within the magnet.
And yet we're getting closer to this attempt to perceive a world which is persistent matter
and nothing more, existing merely in variegated transformations according to interactions
between the different forms of matter.
So Lange sees this as a step in the direction of human beings coming to understand matter
as being persistent.
But all this stuff that Nietzsche brings in with von Baer, comparing him to Heraclitus
yet again, once again shows Heraclitus is not somebody who's typically thought of as
having scientific notions, right?
When he says that duration is essentially an illusion in so many words and that change
is eternal, that's not taken as a scientific statement.
But the reason why Nietzsche then brings in these scientific thought experiments, which
are intensely neocontain, by the way, I mean, if all of our world is a that we experience
as a representation, it's, you know, the work of external reality interacting with
our sense organs, then other beings who have other sense organs or a different physiology,
a different pulse rate might be living in a different representation, so to speak, a
whole different world.
And so following from those neocontain principles, and those ideas about time that we talked
about, Nietzsche comes to compare the, you know, somewhat obscure sayings of Heraclitus
as scientific notions yet again, it's very fascinating.
So we're going to gloss over parminides next.
And this is Nietzsche sees parminides and xenophonies as a dead end in the development
of pre-plotonic philosophy.
And now Nietzsche does see parminides as possessing a mastery of abstract thought, and he has
to master abstract thought in order to assert his central idea, which in parminides case,
just to give a quick version, there's only one thing you can say, and that is the declaration
of the existence of being that it is the only thing you can sensibly say about being.
And so of course, in parminides case, it's not that duration is an illusion, it's that
motion is an illusion, and that if anything, change is the illusion and duration is the
only reality.
Parminides is not a main figure in Nietzsche's eyes, though, and he says further in a letter
to road, he considers parminides a great false step in the interpretations of pre-plotonic
philosophers.
So here's Whitlock, I've abridged this quotation a little bit, but he describes an important
difference between the thought of Nietzsche and the thought of Lange and it concerns parminides.
Parminides claimed the abstract oneness of all being.
His assumption was that our human intellect is the measure of all things.
Becoming therefore belongs among illusions of the senses.
Nietzsche called this twist of thought the most dangerous of all false paths.
Lange considered parminidean being to be a doctrine basic to, but not identical with,
materialistic atomism.
Lange considered the atomists to be pluralists, and parminides and heraclitus to be monists.
He ultimately considered parminides to be the least substantive and fruitful of the pre-plotonics.
Parminides' idea of the senses as delusion led into an epistemological cul-de-sac.
He should not be thought of as a philosopher of nature or physicist at all.
In light of this, we're also going to skip past Zeno with his famous paradox.
He's part of the same school of thought as parminides, although granted he had an impact
on the development of the dialectic and the discussion of problems inherent to these
current conceptions of space-time and motion.
The main problem Nietzsche has here is that he sees Xenophonies, parminides, and Zeno
as essentially being anti-naturalists.
We could spend more time talking about the nuances of them here, but we're not going
to go over every last figure, so we're just going to skip ahead.
The interest of time and just the fact that if we're giving it from Nietzsche's point
of view, he thinks these are a dead end.
Anaxagoras is a pivotal figure for Nietzsche who would come next.
In the character of Anaxagoras, we see definitively that the string of figures each attempting
to describe the nature of the material world were not simply engaging in idle speculation,
but following a dialectic.
Anaxagoras is a great exemplar of how in the pre-plotonic philosophers we find many
of the same conclusions, concepts, or frames of thought that would be rediscovered in later
eras, such as during the Enlightenment of Europe.
Nietzsche interprets Anaxagoras as having discovered the concept of the conservation
of matter, which Longa saw a first inkling of that within Heraclitus and Anaximander.
Conservation of mass is a principle we use in physics to this very day, obviously.
This holds that matter is indestructible, and it simply changes form.
We get a great leap here, and it happens with help from the Iliadics.
The properties which were formerly assigned to being, and which are associated, we might
say especially associated with being among Xeno and Parmenides, that being is indestructible.
This is now applied to becoming, to the matter that makes up the physical world in which
we live.
Anaxagoras revises the hypothesis of Anaximander, the idea of the Aipuron, the indefinite, the
thing in itself.
He says that instead the unlimited is a mixture of all qualities, it's not a quality-less
matter.
It's a mixture of all of them.
For Anaxagoras, the fundamental reality contains the seeds of all things that exist.
That gets over the problem of how do you get things with qualities from a quality-less
thing in itself?
Let's get rid of the quality-less thing.
Where Anaxagoras differs with the Iliadics, he doesn't hold to their view of the oneness
of being.
Anaxagoras is, in all things, a philosopher of multiplicity.
Whitlock writes of him, quote, between Anaxagoras and the Iliadics, Nietzsche argues, existed
a great disjunction.
Either the Iliadics were correct that being is one, and the many, along with motion, do
not exist.
Or Anaxagoras was right, and there are infinitely many beings in motion.
Anaxagoras transferred the properties of Iliadic being to his beings.
And so, singular being to being's plural.
So in Anaxagoras, we have a further refinement of materialism, further progress in explaining
all the movement of matter according to the fewest laws.
The principles he uses are mixing and separating.
So in the picture he gives us, there are infinitely many beings.
They emerge from an initial unlimited which contains all the potential qualities, and
then they behave according to these two fundamental behaviors of mixing and separating.
Not being created or destroyed themselves, these units of matter, but simply combining
and recombining according to mechanistic principles.
Anaxagoras only appeals to some sort of intellect to explain the workings of these processes
when his account of mixing and separating can't explain the effect.
So there's still a god of the gaps here, right, in the form of the noose, you know,
the intellect.
It's an element which is still very much necessary.
But rather than being all-encompassing, as in the Heraclitian idea of, like, say, logos,
here intellect is only used as a last necessity, some sort of divine intellect in the system.
Anaxagoras is expressing this will to, as much as possible, interpret physical phenomena
as governed by non-intelligent mechanistic processes.
And so that's a further step on the road of materialism.
But of course, a dualism still remains here, because that's one of the things that philosophy,
that science, has to overcome, right, that Longus says it has to overcome.
So we simply have a more refined dualism, but it exists.
Now we have this old problem that you have motion, spirited motion, which is found in
organic life, us, animation, right, and then you have the motion of non-living objects.
This still exists in Anaxagoras.
And so then we come to the question of mechanical versus non-mechanical motion.
And the question, can one's philosophical system include both?
Is it permitted to include both?
And so this dualism naturally must be answered, and the next person in the dialectic to answer
it is Empedocles.
Empedocles is a very interesting figure, because he wavered between science and magic, is how
he's described by many people.
Nietzsche describes him, he's a man living on the edge of reason and irrational passions.
Dabbles in poetry and rhetoric are science, religion, oratory, politics.
His significance to our inquiry here is that Empedocles introduces the idea of an original
non-mechanical motion, a first cause which sets all mechanical motion into play, thus
resolving the dualism, right?
This type of argument still employed today in theology, in the form of the first cause
argument for God, right?
Personal being within intelligence.
So even though there are the laws of physics, which mean that angels aren't individually
pushing planets around, the first cause that is God set everything into motion, after which
all the mechanical laws of the universe can then govern everything.
They don't need intelligence managing it at every moment.
But so we get this theological argument today, which we can say we find some form of it or
like say it's indirectly inherited from Empedocles, and his particular attempts in this struggling
towards bringing our world picture into the light of reason.
But Empedocles, of course, has these two sides to him, so he also introduces something which,
in its modern form, is usually considered as one of the opening salvos against religious
thought.
Empedocles developed an idea of natural selection, forms which arise by chance, but which are
shaped or selected for based on conditions.
Schopenhauer had recognized in his writings that Empedocles saw in plant and animal life
an inner dwelling desire.
Schopenhauer believed that this was akin to his own theory, that the inner character
of all things is will, and he considered Empedocles as a forerunner to his own philosophy, as it's
given in world as will and representation.
More interestingly, for our examination, we might consider how Nietzsche believed Empedocles
to correlate in some sense with Darwin on this basis, in the same way that Thales correlates
with Lovacier or Heraclitus with Van Baer.
And so Nietzsche once again shows his influence from Friedrich Lange, who wrote in his History
of Materialism, quote,
What Darwin, relying upon a wide extent of positive knowledge, has achieved for our generation.
Empedocles offered to the thinkers of antiquity.
The simple and penetrating thought that adaptations preponderate in nature just because it is in
their nature to perpetuate themselves, while what fails of adaptation has long since perished.
End quote.
Of course, neither Nietzsche nor Lange could consider someone like Empedocles to be a materialist.
He's really not anything close.
But Empedocles holds to view like the oneness of all things, and he believes that existence
is a form of punishment.
The strife endured within existence is the satisfaction of a kind of moral recompense.
So we can see the precedent for those beliefs in an X-emender, for example, and how they're
getting carried on and those moral ideas are developing as well.
And so that's perhaps one of these pitfalls of your science and your philosophy being
unified, right, is that as you have this dialectic pushing towards materialism, there's also
all this junk that's collecting.
But Empedocles also sees these totally non-mechanistic forces of love and hate sort of governing existence,
which means that Empedocles' overall understanding of the universe is not materialistic at all.
Nevertheless, he's still very important because Nietzsche's knowledge of Schopenhauer and
Schopenhauer's comments on Empedocles probably helped broaden Nietzsche's understanding of
Empedocles' significance.
Because in addition to his point of comparison with Darwin, he can be helpful to Nietzsche
in introducing that conception that's akin to the will, the will that Nietzsche is sort
of using to explain the entire drive towards scientific knowledge.
This is the point of the story when that explanation that Nietzsche is using to explain the drive
to scientific knowledge is discovered by that same drive to scientific knowledge, right?
And so the inner dwelling desire, this driving that exists in all things, which Schopenhauer
associates with his own conception of the will is then carried over into Nietzsche's
interpretation.
We'll look at a Whitlock summary of Empedocles' significance here, and Whitlock sets up, I
think, the implications for us in terms of understanding how this is such a secret beginning
to Nietzsche's philosophizing and how Nietzsche picked up things from his examination of materialism
arising in Greece that would inform ideas throughout his whole career.
So here's Whitlock, and I've abridged this reading yet again, quote.
In this lecture series, the evolution of Nietzsche's theory of the will is most pronounced
in the discussions of Anneximander, Heraclitus, Annexagoras, Empedocles, and the Atomists.
Empedocles took a crucial step toward Newton, Leibniz, and Boskovich.
For the philosopher from Agregentum approached the world as force and matter.
Nietzsche connects the notion of an inner drive, tribe, with the notion of a primal power,
mocked of motion.
These are likewise connected to the notion of force, craft.
All these were crucial steps toward a theory of the will to power, Vilizumacht.
The notion of an inner drive is the Schopenhauerian will.
Rather than love, strife is its dynamic quality.
A great failure of Empedocles was his inability to overcome teleology.
His ordered universe arose from mind.
Nietzsche's profoundly anti-teleological thinking demanded a repudiation of natural
purpose in the Aristotelian sense.
Materialism presupposes such a rejection of teleology, so that Empedocles was ultimately
not a materialist.
It would be left to Democritus to combine all the necessary elements of materialism
into one system.
Here we are so far as that Nietzsche, guided by Longa, as well as Ubreveg, Schopenhauer,
even Zeller, looks at each figure as a fascinating personality, offering a wholly unique philosophical
type, and yet together the pre-Platonics bring forth the development of a purely materialistic
world picture, and we might think of how scientists and philosophers in the Enlightenment, which
Nietzsche is standing at the end of in his own time, some people say were still in the
Enlightenment now, but I would say at the end of like the Romanticist sort of rebellion
against a lot of the Enlightenment thinking, and then the transition into the modernity
and the world wars, I don't know for exactly the same spirit of the Enlightenment that
we were, but however you want to say it, Nietzsche is much closer to that period, and
we might think of how those scientists, they emerged from a similar period of ignorance
and dogmatism, where the intellect was ruled by Aristotelian notions and by theological
prejudices, and it dawned on Nietzsche that the European mind once again had to proceed
out of this dualistic, personified, superstitious understanding of how the world functions,
and was now driving towards more and more mechanistic and material explanations, and
that this same pattern is what the prepletonics had done, but Empedocles is still thinking
teleologically, which is sort of the last thing to get over.
Now it could also be argued Nietzsche has all the raw material for will to power and
the prepletonics that he's discussed, and what is will to power?
I don't mean what is the actual will to power, the actual content, I'm saying like what is
Nietzsche doing when he comes up with the theory of will to power?
I mean, Nietzsche's theory of will to power is his attempt to explain the world with as
few laws as possible, with one law that governs existence, so we must consider the possibility
that will to power for Nietzsche is not just a metaethical principle, it's not just a psychological
principle, it's a scary thought, you know, scary for those of us who have safely compartmentalized
the grandiose claims about will to power into being, you know, purely psychological statements,
right?
It's a scary thought that will to power may have started, may have originated as an attempt
by Nietzsche to philosophize in the manner of the prepletonics.
Nietzsche's attempt to craft a world picture that unifies both science and philosophy and
explains the material world by by means of matter and the use of a single principle.
Now with democratists, it's the last figure we'll consider among the prepletonics, and
it's the climatic part of the lecture where we finally have a complete materialistic theory.
And this doesn't mean that democratists has solved all the questions in physics, right?
It means that with democratists, we have a view of the world in which no intelligence
or personified spiritual forces or dualism is necessary.
Democratists gives us a theory of the atom.
We get the word atom from democratists.
And so he says, all things are made of atoms.
And we can see how this develops out of the work of Annexagoras, the philosopher of multiplicity,
but democratists refines it even further.
Democratists defines atoms as the smallest unit of matter, the most fundamental unit from
which all other forms are constructed.
This is the universe's multiplicity, as Annexagoras describes it, but democratists makes all things
nothing but atoms and void.
Rather than appealing to a non-mechanistic first cause, or a metaphysical force such
as love, democratists sees, as Nietzsche says in his lecture, quote, no chance whatsoever
but rather the most rigorous lawfulness, only not according to the laws of reason.
Well then, democratists derives all motion from empty space and weight, or mass, the
German word is Schwer.
Many atoms sink down and drive the smaller ones upward by pressure, end quote.
Whitlock summarizes Nietzsche's overall assessment of democratists, quoting in an abridged form
here, quote, the lectures on democratists and the late Pythagoreans are the dialectical
culmination of the lecture series, for they arrive at a mathematical atomism, the most
powerful of the ancient systems and the inner expression of will the Greeks had to explicate.
This lecture also clearly shows Nietzsche rejecting Schopenhauer's old worn out objections
to materialism, an enthusiastic favor of materialistic atomism.
Though reading between the lines reveals that Nietzsche was simultaneously developing his
own theory of will within this materialistic atomistic discourse, the lecturer does not
hesitate to announce that atomism is quote, the truth for us, end quote.
And what Whitlock quotes immediately afterwards is something that I'll just read, it's from
back in the lecture, because it shows how Nietzsche sort of identifies with democratists
here at the end, quote, materialism is a worthwhile hypothesis of relativity and truth.
Accordingly, all is false has been discovered to be an illuminating notion for natural science.
We still consider then all its results to be truth for us, albeit not absolute.
It is precisely our world in whose production we are constantly engaged, end quote.
And so in these remarks that will be perhaps frustrating for the epistemological realists
out there, Nietzsche again tells us something useful about the way that he thinks.
There's a general attitude at this point in his career that's inherited from the Neocontians
that we live in a world of representations.
That reality as we experience it is not an objective mind independent reality.
Now this doesn't mean there's no external reality, Nietzsche criticizes that idea in
Beyond Good and Evil simply by saying our sense organs are not themselves representations
of our organs that would be absurd.
Nevertheless, as the neuroscientist and noted reality skeptic David Hoffman has said, when
we look at the neuron, you know, at a neuron of the brain, for instance, even through an
electron microscope, we're still just looking at a pixel.
The neuron as we see it is a representation of something in the external world that our
brain is creating.
We live in our nervous systems, right?
We can break down the pixel into infinitely smaller pixels, but it's still just all pixels.
It's a symbolical representation for something with which we have no direct experience.
And so that's Nietzsche's mindset epistemologically.
And it's interesting how his thought did develop on this as he went on.
But at the time of these lectures, I think this is the world Nietzsche is living in.
And I think in that mindset, we can see the sense in what he's saying that mathematical
atomism is the most refined form of materialism.
And that's true for both the Greeks and for those in Nietzsche's time.
And even though the state of science in Europe was far more advanced than it had been during
the time of the pre-platonics, Nietzsche's argument here is really one more of philosophy
of science than of a scientific nature itself.
That democratists coming from a time when science and philosophy were unified brings
about the dawning of a new mindset and a new view of the world.
And now that our science and our philosophy are seen as separate things, we perhaps don't
see the ways in which scientific knowledge or scientific hypotheses carry with them this
shift in our view of reality.
We live in an atomistic world these days, just as democratists did.
That we think of our reality as consisting of particles, of smaller building blocks governed
by physical laws, which are non-personal, non-intelligent, mechanistic.
We live today in a democratian world.
And I think that's what Nietzsche is pointing to about how this is the truth for us when
we behold democratists, we're seeing somebody who has come around to the same worldview that
we have come around to.
And so the narrative Nietzsche discovers is what I've called, as the title of the episode,
the descent into materialism.
It's an archetypal narrative, almost, of how the arising of philosophy, the cultivation
of this useless knowledge, this wisdom that endeavors to bound the boundless, state clearly
all that is obscured and secret in the world.
This necessarily arises hand in hand with science.
It inevitably represents an ever stronger tendency toward materialism.
And the final form of this is atomism, which we get to a democratist or in Nietzsche's
own time.
I would argue we still tend to think about things that way today.
Nietzsche therefore reinterprets the significance of science in accord with his own cyclical
ideas of time.
He sees the same phenomenon in ancient Greece as in Enlightenment Europe, because both are
expressions of the same underlying will, even though the details, the conditions are different.
But the will drives us to the same ends, because it's the same thing fundamentally in Nietzsche
incarnation.
And so I think it's best to describe this as a descent as well.
And I intend this in both the positive and the negative connotations, because on the
positive side of things, the pre-plotonics initiate this project of Greek philosophy
out of a will to bring the Greek psyche down to earth.
To take us out of flighty abstractions, take us away from that mystified gaze up to the
personified heavens, the psychodrama that the Greeks saw in the stars, and instead look
to the smallest, most mundane things and take joy in understanding them.
This turn of our perspective inevitably leads us to learn the patterns by which things on
earth behave.
And we begin to explain the world less and less by recourse of reaching up into the clouds,
until finally with Democritus, we can explain the world without reaching into mythology
at all.
But there's a negative side, and there's a negative sense to the word descent, that
this descent into materialism is also a descent into nihilism.
We discussed this in the episode we just did on nihilism, and it's what Nietzsche called
the problem of science in so many words.
It achieves its final form, so to speak, in the figure to follow Democritus and the later
Pythagoreans, who was Socrates.
He's who basically comes next in the dialogue, the mystagogue of science, the man who made
reason a universal and binding principle, waged war on all the dogmas and superstitions
and illusions.
Science becomes this totalizing force, even when it threatens the preservation or the expansion
of life.
And so here too, in this early philological study, Nietzsche finds one of the central
questions and the problems that concerned his whole career.
Nietzsche, at this time, he places himself in the milieu of the prepletonics and their
quest for a materialist world picture, and influenced as he is by Longa, who is a materialist,
Nietzsche considers the creation of a purely materialist worldview as a form of triumph,
but he nevertheless has begun to see where materialism will inexorably lead, in life
being sacrificed to the truth, and this arrives with the figure of Socrates.
And so, you know, this project really becomes, how can this tragic end to the development
of philosophy be overcome or dealt with?
That's like a central project of Nietzsche's, but that all begins here.
All right, so that's it, we're going to do a similar subject matter next week, we're
going to actually continue with a lot of the same text, but we're going to, we barely
touched on Democritus, and he's in fact so significant to later Nietzsche, in parallel
with another figure, Boskovich.
So we're going to spend the next episode talking about these two people, they're scientists
and philosophers of science.
One ancient and one sort of like, I guess you'd say, pre-modern, it's Democritus
and Boskovich, and Schopenhauer and Spinoza I think will make appearances to you, special
guest appearances.
Because what comes out of this, which we've only barely touched on, is an attempt at a
scientific theory to the will to power.
And so, the next episode is all about that, the world as will to power, and nothing besides.
So I'm excited, we're getting into, I like that we've gotten into more obscure stuff
now, and I guess this was another long episode, but you know, it's just gotta go until it's
finished, I guess.
Alright, so join me again next week, y'all.
Alright, signing off.
Quote, of all the more ancient systems, the Democritian is of the greatest consequence.
The most rigorous necessity is presupposed in all things.
There are no sudden or strange violations of nature's course.
Now for the first time, the collective anthropomorphic mythic view of the world has been overcome.
Now for the first time, do we have a rigorous scientific useful hypothesis?
As such, materialism has always been of the greatest utility.
It is the most down-to-earth point of view.
It proceeds from real properties of matter, and it does not indifferently leave out the
simplest forces, as is done by accounts of mind, or that of final ends by Aristotle.
It is a grand idea, this entire world of order and purposiveness, of countless qualities
to be traced back to externalizations of one force of the most basic sort.
Matter, moving itself according to general laws, produces a blind, mechanistic result,
which appears to be the outline of a highest wisdom.
End quote.
That was Nietzsche from his lecture on Democritus in the pre-plotonic lecture series.
Democritus was the philosopher of ancient Greece who coined the term Adam, for the concept
of the smallest unit of matter.
Democritus asserted that all matter was made up of forms constructed of smaller units,
and the smallest of these were atoms.
Through strictly naturalistic processes, atoms interact, and from a totally blind nature
we get all of the movements and emergent phenomena that we experience in reality.
And so here we see, in Nietzsche's estimation, the significance of Democritus, the first
truly materialistic or purely materialistic natural philosopher, who overcomes all of
these mythic personifications of the world, and all of these appeals to a non-mechanistic
first cause, or metaphysical forces such as love or hate, such as what had been introduced
by previous figures in their explanations of the world.
Democritus doesn't have to introduce a moral or metaphysical element to explain existence,
as, for example, Empedocles did before him.
He does not have to appeal to Noose, the element of there being some underlying intellect governing
the world, as we see in, for example, Annexagoras, who also preceded Democritus.
Annexagoras sometimes has to invoke a divine intellect as an explanation, even though he
was driving, along with the other pre-plotonic philosophers, towards this sort of methodological
materialism.
In Democritus, as Nietzsche interprets him, the Greeks reach a zenith of materialism,
and this is what he designates as a mathematical atomism.
In this, all qualitative descriptions can be put into quantities.
All movement of the universe occurs without the need of an intelligence, and this opens
up the possibility for science to branch off down its various paths.
Nietzsche here acknowledges the power, the utility of atomism as a framework for understanding
the world, and he believes that atomism is the direction in which the science of his
own day was proceeding.
But notice another element in Nietzsche's words about Democritus, something he sees
in Democritus is very fascinating in light of Nietzsche's own ideas, which he would
not fully describe until much later in his career.
He clearly shows an interest in the grand idea, as he calls it, of an entire world being
called forth in all of its infinite complexities from a single force.
Indeed, throughout the pre-plotonic lectures, Nietzsche believes that the Greek drive to
philosophy revealed that underlying the philosophical project is a will to bound the world within
as few first principles as possible.
The zenith of that attempt is therefore a single principle.
This was the task of the philosopher in the days of the pre-plotonics, when science and
philosophy were still unified to explain reality by as few possible laws.
And so can Nietzsche dare to undertake such a task in his own time, of finding a single
force to explain the entirety of existence, from which all the other principles can be
derived.
Think the spark of that idea occurs here, and note again that this is a materialist endeavor
for Nietzsche.
He does not conceive of this quest as in itself necessarily metaphysical, because like Democritus,
he does not reach into the heavens for explanations wherever there is a gap, but rather attempts
to explain the physical solely by means of the physical.
Nietzsche's own attempt culminates with the concept of will to power.
Will to power is the single principle, formula, law, or force, whatever we want to call it,
by which Nietzsche will attempt to explain the entire world.
And while will to power need not be taken to this level, of this kind of perspective
on it in order to be useful, I mean many people employ will to power simply as an ethical
or psychological principle, including myself in many ways.
But this strange intersection of will to power with the explanations for the physical world
is in the backdrop of Nietzsche's philosophy.
And it's tied in with his odd theories of time and with his notion of the eternal recurrence.
And it's been argued that will to power therefore first emerges for Nietzsche not in a moral
or psychological aspect, but while he's in the process of examining scientific ideas.
And you know, insofar as we may say that science itself is doing ontology, that's what he's
doing, right?
So if we've abandoned the true world and we believe the ontological reality to be the
material world that we all live in, in that sense you could say that Nietzsche is talking
about will to power as a sort of ontological force.
This idea comes with a million caveats, of course, and for all of those you can listen
to the preceding episodes of the podcast.
For today, however, the topic is Nietzsche's scientific influences for the idea of will
to power and will to power as an explanatory principle within physics or within the context
of thinking about physics.
Can we make any sense of will to power in this sense?
Does it have any use for us for, you know, today?
And can understanding this scientific angle on the will to power give us any insight into
the other nuances of Nietzsche's philosophy, and I would say that it does.
It's not required that you listen to the previous episode, Descent into Materialism, but I'll
just say at this point, you probably will get more out of this one if you listen to
that one first, since it gives a lot of context for the way Nietzsche thinks and how his philosophy
of science compares and contrasts with previous views of science.
But just as a summary, I guess, a brief synopsis, Nietzsche's heavily influenced by neocontine
interpretations of the history of science.
He draws as much insight from the pre-plotonic philosophers of ancient Greece as he does
from contemporary figures.
And finally, Nietzsche is himself very much engaged in a dialogue with the sciences and
addressing himself to ideas about the philosophy of science proposed by the great philosophers
that came before him.
And so more than anything, if you didn't listen to that talk, the most important thing to
know is that Nietzsche was very much up to date on the developments in the sciences.
He was very concerned with the philosophy of science, and rather than being an irrationalist,
he sees himself, at least in his early career, as being a scientific materialist.
Now, of course, some of his later statements might actually contradict that, but nevertheless,
I think that is how he understood his idea of will to power at this point, as coming
out of a dialectic between past materialist philosophers of science.
And the funny thing here is, I can't call it dialectical materialism, because Marxists
have claimed that particular designation.
But what we're talking about here is quite literally a dialogue, a dialectical development
of a view of the world occurring between materialists in a scientific sense.
And we could say that today, almost all scientists are the product of this dialectic, and so
far as they're all mostly materialists, at least again, in a methodological sense.
Sure, there are some oddballs out there who profess panpsychism and similar things, but
in Nietzsche's time, not everyone was materialist.
And so that's why it's important to zero in on the fact that it is this materialist branch
of neocontain philosophy that's most influential in Nietzsche's thinking here, and that there
were actually other options out there at the time.
And we'll get into those a little bit as we continue.
Again, we find Friedrich Albert Lange, who wrote the History of Materialism, is a key
influence on Nietzsche's thought.
We talked a lot about Lange last time as sort of guiding Nietzsche through understanding
the pre-plotonic philosophers.
I thought I'd read some quotations here that more straightforwardly established that link
and help support the case for this week's talk, that Democritus of all people would
be a main influence on Nietzsche and his will to power idea.
But when we examine how Democritus is treated in Lange's work, this interpretation comes
together very nicely.
So in any case, George J. Stack noted that Nietzsche said that Lange's book, History
of Materialism, was a, quote, treasure chest of ideas presented to him, end quote.
This recalls Whitehead's phrasing that Plato's work is an inexhaustible mine of suggestion.
For Nietzsche, he found that in Lange.
And so Nietzsche wrote in 1866, quote, the most significant philosophical work to appear
in the last decade is without a doubt Lange, History of Materialism, about which I could
write voluminous praise, Kant, Schopenhauer, and this book by Lange.
I do not need more than that, end quote.
Now of course, Nietzsche would expand beyond those influences such as Kant and Schopenhauer,
and he would therefore expand beyond Lange as well.
But while Schopenhauer's name, for example, comes up all the time when we talk about Nietzsche's
influences, Lange hardly comes up at all.
And so that's one of the reasons why I think it's important to emphasize him throughout
this sort of detour into Nietzschean science we're doing here at the end of the season,
because he's so explanatory of Nietzsche's thinking on this.
So again, when it comes to Nietzsche's interpretation of Democritus, Democritus is central to Lange's
book.
While Lange mentions the other pre-Socratic philosophers, or pre-Platonics as Nietzsche
calls them, Democritus gets far more attention from Lange than any other among the pre-Socratics.
And as a matter of fact, Lange's book actually begins with a chapter entitled, The Early
Atomists, Especially Democritus.
Not only does this discussion of Democritus begin the work, but Democritus plays a central
role in the entire book for Lange.
Lange asserts in that work, quote, the modern atomic theory has been gradually developed
from the atomism of Democritus, end quote.
Centrality of Democritus is the main pre-Socratic figure.
It was sort of shared in the viewpoint of Zeller.
We talked a little bit about Zeller last time.
He's a semi-Hegelian philologist with whom Nietzsche had some agreements and some disagreements.
It's worth noting that for the pre-Platonic lectures, Nietzsche mostly critiques Zeller,
but one of the only points of agreement that he finds is that Zeller is aligned with Lange
when it comes to understanding the importance of Democritus.
And so Democritus is the culmination of the Materials Project in Ancient Greece.
He also presents us with another archetypal personality among the pre-Platonic philosophers.
So if we'll remember Nietzsche sees, he thinks it's very important that the pre-Platonics
emerge at a time before there's a definitive thing such as a school or cast of philosophers.
And each of them has to sort of define what it means to be a philosopher on his own.
And so he presents all of them as this series of fascinating, unique personalities.
And when it comes to Democritus, he's known as the laughing philosopher.
He's often contrasted with Heraclitus, the philosopher who was associated with sadness
and melancholy.
And I personally might question these designations as maybe being a bit anachronistic.
But nevertheless, this is the common picture, Democritus is the philosopher who laughs.
And perhaps this is because Democritus praises cheerfulness in his own work.
And so we have a presentation of a worldview which is, for the first time, scientific and
more or less fully liberated from mythology, but this is done cheerfully by someone who
meets this entirely material existence with a laugh.
And so we cannot help but see something resembling a joyous science within the figure of Democritus.
Well, Nietzsche probably got that coinage, the phrase, gay science or joyous science
from Emerson.
But Nietzsche's admiration for Democritus, for the Democratian approach to life and
to knowledge, that may have been one of the influences that sort of led to him to conceive
of the concept of such a gay science.
And so not only does Nietzsche describe the atomism of Democritus as constituting this
most consequential of all ancient theories, but furthermore, we see in Democritus and
his forerunner, Lucipus, another innovation.
They produce a perspectival theory of human experience in which we might recognize the
prefiguration of the sort of phenomena, numinous, split of Kant, which influenced the scientific
thinking of the Neocontians.
So Democritus' description of thought and of sensation are that images, or we might
say representations, affect the body from outside or they stimulate the body from outside
if there's an outside stimulus which is then transformed into an image.
And that even the basis of thoughts themselves are images or representations, we might say.
And so certainly Nietzsche would recognize, he recognizes the kinship here in this picture
of cognition with Schopenhauer and the Neocontians, von Helmholtz and Longa.
But we must turn to the most consequential aspect of Democritus.
What is the atomism of Democritus, the man who gave us the very word atom, which we
use to this day?
In the atomic theory of Democritus, we have the idea of atoms as indivisible.
They're indivisible units, they're the bedrock unit of matter, so naturally they're the point
at which particles of matter cannot be divided into any more parts.
Different forms of matter are simply different arrangements of atoms or different shapes that
exist in different positions in space.
These are all constructed of atoms, and when bodies perish, the atoms in them disassemble,
but the atoms themselves are not created or destroyed, so we have conservation of matter.
And furthermore, Democritus sees atoms as moving entirely in accord with laws governing
weight, so they don't undergo, they're completely explained by mechanistic processes, they don't
undergo direct contact, and action at a distance does not occur.
Now of course, this means there's an inevitable split or separation between what we perceive
through the senses and what actually exists, sort of the hallmark of Greek philosophy,
right?
And that would seem to be required furthermore by the Democritian account of perception and
cognition.
So if there are these units of matter that are so small, we cannot see them with enough
specificity to see the boundaries between them, such a difference between what we perceive
and what the world truly is would seem to be required, right?
And so nevertheless, we can still say that there's something different has occurred here,
though, just to push back on that, that this is not quite the distinction between perception
and knowledge of the type held by, say, Plato or the Christians, in which true knowledge
of the world sort of reveals forces and principles which transcend the material world.
Democritus still holds some methodological materialism, as we've called it.
It's merely, you know, the difference between perception and the true world, quote unquote,
in the case of Democritus, would be the equivalent in modern times to like the difference between
what one sees with their eyes, with the naked eye, versus what one sees through an electron
microscope, right?
Unless we're going to say that what we see through the microscope constitutes a metaphysical
world, which I don't think most people would, then we can excuse Democritus on this.
And it's worth noting that later scientific discovery backs up what he said.
We do see smaller and smaller building blocks.
And so Democritus has been vindicated, although I should say the term used for Adam in the
modern day doesn't really correspond to Adam's, as Democritus described them, since the Adam
is by definition the smallest possible unit of matter.
So once you start talking about subatomic particles, you're using the word in a different
way than Democritus would have understood it, right, just by definition there.
So furthermore, also, Democritus is not perfect in every sense as a materialist.
For example, he permits that between atoms of matter exist atoms of soul, and soul is
conceived as a kind of invigorating force, which Whitlock asserts might serve the function
of being a prefiguration of the will to power, a prefiguration in the mind of Nietzsche.
The atoms of soul are almost more like a field than what we would consider to be solid matter.
But remember, materialism doesn't mean that things like energy don't exist.
Perhaps we could see the Democritian view as sort of like a low resolution understanding
that there has to be some sort of energy in the system.
So it's still a material explanation.
And the other component in how Nietzsche thinks about will to power scientifically might have
been influenced by precursors to field theory, right?
And so he's maybe able to interpret Democritus in that way.
In any case, Democritus does have to account for mind, and for consciousness, and movement.
And what all this ends up being is yet another form of material, of matter.
And that's very different from how Heraclitus or Anaxagoras or Empedocles might see something
like mind or spirit.
And so in a passage from Longa, he expresses this aspect of Democritus as one of the triumphs
of his natural philosophy.
Longa writes, quote,
Democritus regarded mind not as the world-building force, but only as one form of matter amongst
others.
And this is just Democritus's superiority for every philosophy which seriously attempts
to understand the phenomenal world must come back to this point.
The special case of those processes we call intellectual must be explained from the universal
laws of motion, or we have no explanation at all.
But he who devises some bungling explanation of nature, including the rational actions
of mankind, starting from mere conjectural, a priori notions, which is it is impossible
for the mind to picture intelligibly to itself, destroys the whole basis of science, no matter
whether he be called Aristotle or Hegel.
Good old Kant would here undoubtedly in principle declare himself on the side of Democritus
and against Aristotle and Zeller, end quote.
So maybe that passage started out rather clear, but then he starts talking about all these
other figures.
So let's clarify this passage a little bit.
Well, the first thing we might bring up in clarifying the passage further, there's one
of Nietzsche's unpublished notes that Whitlock references.
But Whitlock references this note without a citation, only to call it overlooked and cryptic,
which is funny because he himself overlooked the citation.
So I don't know where to find this in Nietzsche's work.
But according to Whitlock, Nietzsche wrote that his intellectual heritage is derived
from anti-teleological spinosists on the one hand and mechanists on the other.
And I think that's justifiably a rather cryptic remark because Nietzsche says he may be understood
properly only in this context.
And that's a very, you know, on the face of it, that's a strange origin story for Nietzsche's
intellectual tradition for he himself to give.
I mean, it would probably sound strange to pretty much anyone who hasn't looked into
this angle of Nietzsche's thought, his philosophy of science, right?
But so when he invokes spinosists, obviously that refers to Spinoza, Baruch Spinoza was
a philosopher from the 17th century.
He was from Amsterdam, or he lived in Amsterdam, but he was of a Sephardic Jewish origin.
And he's one of the leading figures among the rationalists.
And he crafted a worldview in which mankind and the world as we know it, and even God
are viewed from a sort of naturalistic lens.
And Nietzsche had great respect for Spinoza.
He called him a precursor to his own ideas.
And one similarity we'll immediately see when we compare Nietzsche and Spinoza, for example,
is that both reject the existence of free will, at least in the way free will is normally
presented.
Spinoza's rejection of Descartes' mind-body dualism also aligns Spinoza with Nietzsche's
outlook, right?
But Spinoza had caused something, he had caused a mighty controversy called either the Spinozist
controversy or the Pantheism controversy.
This emerges in the German philosophical circles, in the academic and philosophical circles.
This is because Spinoza had been a pantheist, and he had thus seen God as the effective
force in all things.
This picture of the world was therefore naturalistic, but not really materialist, I mean it's dependent
on the power of an ever-present divine force.
It's less personal in Spinoza's view than the traditional Christian view, something
more akin to a force or a field, right?
But it's nevertheless associated with God, and as an imminent, all-encompassing divinity.
So what came with the popularity of Spinozistic metaphysics in the German intellectual circles
was a tendency towards teleologist positions on science.
What does that mean?
It means, even though there's a genuine attempt to understand the world, via natural law,
this is still done within a framework in which the world exists for some purpose.
Also, and that's what atelos means, is a purpose.
So it's still done within a framework in which the world exists for the sake of some divine
force, for the purpose crafted by an absolute mind, or whatever the case might be.
And this goes all the way back to Aristotle, a teleology for the world in the Aristotelian
sense.
It implies that the reality we live in and experience as a contingent reality, subject
to some other dominant reality.
If this life exists for some purpose or ends, that means there's some other thing whose
end it serves, whether that's another world or this imminent divine intellect or whatever.
And so that claim of a teleological universe became very popular in Germany, and then there
was a backlash to this.
There arose an anti-teleologist camp among German intellectuals, and this even included
many Spinozists.
They took influence from Spinoza's ideas, but nevertheless came down against teleology.
And so these are the anti-teleological Spinozists that Nietzsche references.
In that quotation we just looked at from Longa, he sort of implies what this divide is.
He shows us the divide and who he's talking about, right, between the teleologists and
the anti-teleologists.
Also he brings up Aristotle, and he groups him together with Hegel.
These are examples of thinkers who had teleological explanations of nature, Aristotle's inclusion,
rather obvious, Hegel's included here, also rather obviously, Hegel sees life and history
as a revelation of the absolute.
So for Hegel, life and history, therefore, have a telos, which is the revelation of the
absolute mind to itself, or however, you know, I'd love to have a Hague alien on, if anyone
knows a good Hague alien, you know, maybe, I don't, I mean, I know of them, right?
I know Gizek and things like that, but I don't know any good Hague alien philosophers who
are like popular.
So if you know one, let me know.
But anyway, that's just an aside.
So Zeller, for his Hague alienism, he's included as another candidate, as an opposing figure
to the worldview of Longa, who comes down on this anti-teleological side, right?
So Zeller, as we mentioned, somewhat Hague alien, so he's included with Hegel and Aristotle.
Now on the anti-teleologist side, Longa suggests Kant would stand over on his side of the question,
on his side of the aisle, and that would also be the side of Democritus.
And we could recall the passage we quoted from last week from Kant, where Kant sort
of delights in the prospect that one could give him matter and he could give you a world
from it, right?
That simply applying his reason to understanding the laws and patterns governing matter and
its interactions with the world, you could start with the universe in a chaotic, unformed
state of just one kind of thing, one kind of matter, one form, a fundamental form of
matter and Kant can give you a world out of it, right?
That's exactly what Democritus did.
So it makes Kant, Democritus, Longa, and yes, Nietzsche in the camp, which is anti-teleological.
So Nietzsche, accordingly, in his pre-plutonic lectures, draws the comparison between Democritus
and Kant.
So and since Longa drew that same comparison, we could conclude this is another thing he
possibly gets from Longa, that we might be seeing Longa's influence in that very passage.
And so when Nietzsche says in this cryptic note that anti-teleological spinosists are
one camp from which he descends intellectually, these would be figures like Longa and Ubreveg,
who were influenced by Spinoza, but rejected Spinoza's idea of a telos for the world.
And then the other people who would easily say are mechanists, and so we might just say
people who would, this would include anyone who has anti-teleological views or methodologically
anti-teleological views, especially those who existed even prior to Spinoza, and so figures
like Bacon, Kant, and of course, Democritus.
And so another quote from Longa puts this even more directly, again, this is from history
of materialism, quote, Aristotle complains repeatedly that Democritus, leaving aside
teleological causes, had explained everything by a necessity of nature.
This is exactly what Bacon praises most strongly in his book on the advancement of learning,
end quote.
And so of course, Longa agrees with Bacon and not Aristotle.
And it demonstrates in the way how Bacon praises Democritus for the very same thing
that Aristotle criticizes.
It reveals that dichotomy, anti-teleological thinking versus teleological.
And so Longa suggests where Democritus may have been lacking, and this I think provides
an area in which Nietzsche sees a way that he can innovate.
And so Longa writes, quote, of all the great principles underlying materialism in our time,
one only is wanting and Democritus, and that is the abolition of all teleology by the principle
of the development of the purposeful from the unpurposeful.
We find in him no trace of that false teleology, which may be described as the hereditary foe
of all science, but we discover nowhere an attempt to explain the origin of these adaptations
from the blind sway of natural necessity, end quote.
And so Longa argues, the only true refutation of a teleology for the world, you know, the
refutation of the world having a purpose and intelligence or like some sort of world-building
mind, it would be to show how purpose can arise from purposelessness.
Because we as conscious beings, we have minds, we have consciousness.
We come up with concepts such as purpose.
We create things that do have a telos, and we give a telos to things which we did not
even create.
So, you know, you craft something like a chair, which has a telos in its very creation, right?
The chair is for your sitting, but you could also use a tree stump to sit upon, right?
And so it's the fact that we have this mind which not only perceives things, but also imparts
a purpose to things according to what we value or need or prefer.
And so a materialist understanding is confronted, I mean, in some sense you could reduce it
to what we today call the hard problem of consciousness, where you have to account for
a mind which invents ideas like purpose, goal, and end, which means your materialist theory
ultimately has to take account of values, meaning, right?
A naturalistic theory which doesn't reach outside the world of matter that can provide
a meaning for mankind, or rather, more precisely, provides an explanation for how meaning arises,
where it comes from, why we have a notion of it.
And that's, too long ago would be the only acceptable refutation of teleology, or the
only effective thing, the only thing that would really do the trick.
And so that's an interesting clue, I think, if we take it seriously, as to what Nietzsche's
philosophical project becomes aimed at.
It's another way of seeing how these questions are opening up for Nietzsche as we keep going
here.
But by refusing to engage in teleology, admirable as that is, without really giving that explanation
that Longus sees as essential, Democritus leaves his theories open to misinterpretation.
Democritus believes that nothing is up to random chance, but as Longa notes, his materialist
denial of final causes led some to misunderstand Democritus as ultimately preaching just such
a belief in chance, right?
And so a distinction has to be made between chance and necessity, which Nietzsche sees
in Democritus's work, and on that basis sort of uses that to refute the people, refute
the interpretation of Democritus as simply believing in random chance by saying he doesn't
believe in chance, he believes in necessity.
And we could say maybe there's a, Nietzsche can see this in one of his other influences
because Schopenhauer made this distinction between basing things on chance and basing
things on the principle of sufficient reason.
And so Nietzsche also makes this distinction between chance and necessity here, or he's
able to see it very clearly.
And so through the influence of Longa and Nietzsche, we have a clear battle line, teleology
as the opposing force of science, and Longa's main critique of Democritus was that he rejected
teleology, but he didn't adequately defeat it, we might say, by accounting for telos naturalistically,
or for teloi as we encounter them, or as our minds come up with them.
The process of teloi generation, we might say, right?
What is the production of telos?
Where does that come from?
And so Democritus sets the stage for future anti-teleologists, such as Nietzsche, to address
this issue.
Whitlock writes, quote, Longa and Nietzsche nearly identified teleological reason with
religious anthropomorphism.
Democritus' atomism rejecting teleology, if incompletely, his intellectual discovery
laid the groundwork for the mathematical Pythagoreans, end quote.
It's worth saying Nietzsche would later grow out of this position, or out of pure mechanism,
we'll say.
And it's very subtle, the change in mindset for Nietzsche, but it's difficult to place
later Nietzsche within this solidly and completely mechanistic camp.
And as his thought matured, he would later critique Longa and Ubreveg as being part of
the, quote, Church of Materialism, end quote.
And I think it's because Nietzsche eventually becomes skeptical and questions the whole
belief and cause and effect, which is, it's like almost a whole other can of worms, right?
It's nevertheless still very instructive here, and we're thinking about what started Nietzsche
down the road, thinking about many of his later ideas, to consider how the foundation
was mechanistic, materialistic, anti-teleological.
That's why I would say he starts from a truly atheistic position, and I said he's the first
truly atheistic philosopher, or I characterized him that way, like way back in the first
episode, as I recall correctly.
So now, in discussing the often overlooked significance of Democritus to Nietzsche's
philosophy, we have seen how Nietzsche's thought is so deferential to that, Friedrich
Albert Longa, that in some sense we can't even really compare the thoughts of the two,
because the overlap is near total.
But there was an aspect to Nietzsche's thought that went beyond Longa, and that is insofar
as he brought in a scientist who was regarded at the time as an obscure, or even a fringe
sort of figure, and that's the Croatian physicist, mathematician, and philosopher of
science, Roger Josef Boskovich, I believe his name and his native tongue would be like
Rogiero, but I'm not exactly sure how to pronounce Croatian, so.
He lived and wrote in the 18th century, and his most famous work is published in 1758,
Theory of Natural Philosophy, derived from a single law of forces which exist in nature,
which contains Boskovich's atomic theory and his theory of forces.
Boskovich was attractive to Nietzsche for a reason that would be very obvious in light
of our analysis of how Nietzsche has been thinking about the project of science, because
Boskovich provided a single equation, a single force for describing how every different manifestation
of force expresses itself in the physical world.
And so, Boskovich's ideas, they actually did not find a wide purchase at the time when
he was writing, but his place in science has been somewhat rejuvenated in recent years.
There are some such as Dragoslav Stojlikovic, not exactly sure how to pronounce his name,
but he's called Boskovich the father of modern science, and a sort of forerunner to the quantum
theory, or quantum physics, and all sorts of things.
So, in bringing Boskovich into his thinking, Nietzsche parts ways with many of these figures
that we've talked about as being his influences.
Boskovich is the final element in Nietzsche's scientific thinking that we haven't yet covered,
and with Boskovich's help, Nietzsche goes beyond all his precursors.
And Whitlock describes this, and I'm going to quote from his commentary on the lecture
in an abridged form, quote,
the only reasonable account of the phenomenal world, the problem of motion remains.
This is crucial to note, Newton introduced the existence of God to explain the enigma
of motion.
For this reason, among others, Schopenhauer remarked that science solves enigmas only by
introducing occult terms.
This agrees with constant action, of the a priori judgment God exists.
Nietzsche knew well that motion is a physical enigma with profound metaphysical implications.
One of Newton's contemporaries, Roger Boskovich, attempted to solve the enigma of motion outside
the framework of Newtonian explanation via the principle of action at a distance.
Schopenhauer decried this highly controversial principle as another occult force, whereas
Kant saw it as a threat to both God and Newton, and so constructed the architectronic of his
system in part as a bulwark against Boskovichian physics.
This controversy around Boskovich was itself a dynamic and the larger cultural debate about
spinosism, an encroaching materialistic atheism.
Boskovich, although a devout Catholic, did not require God to explain motion in his system,
as did Newton.
For a quite similar reason, Leibnizian monodology was seen as a non-Newtonian alternative to
Kantianism that avoided the Boskovichian point-particle system.
Uberveg and Lange, following Hemholz, rejected Boskovich, in this way they decisively parted
company with Nietzsche.
He brings up Leibniz at the end there.
We don't need to get into the specifics of that.
Just to understand, he's sort of saying that Boskovichian physics was so controversial,
so scary to people, because it could explain motion without appeal to God.
He alleges basically Kant sees it therefore as a threat to God, into the Newtonian system
which appeals to God.
Even if you must step outside of Newtonianism, well, here we've got Leibniz over here who
don't go to Boskovich, right?
There's an alternative to that.
Everyone had sort of avoided Boskovich because of this, and Whitlock seems to think that it's
because there's this sort of undertone that with Boskovich, even though he's a Catholic,
this encroaching materialistic atheism comes with his physics, because of what it has the
power to do.
Nietzsche became very excited by Boskovichian point-particle theory.
Nietzsche's point-particles are not corpuscular atoms, or sorry, corpuscular atoms, as in
the Newtonian system, which form the basis of Kant's understanding as well.
Kant's matter is Newtonian matter, and it's made of these corpuscular atoms.
Corpuscular atoms are extended, they're bodies, we might say.
Force points, on the other hand, are non-extended, non-corpuscular.
Unlike the Democartian atoms, or Newtonian atoms, Boskovichian force points do engage
in action at a distance.
They don't interpenetrate, and in fact, Boskovich mathematically demonstrated how they could
both attract and repulse one another in accord with the same underlying mathematical principle.
It's very fascinating, even though the math is very much beyond me.
In Nietzsche's interpretation of Boskovich, the units that comprise what matter is are
less like solid atoms, individual bodies, but more like a field.
And these fields are sort of made up of the interaction of force points, each could be
called a quanta of power, or to speak the language of Nietzsche's later philosophy, a quanta
of will to power.
And so will to power will become, in Nietzsche's philosophical retelling of Boskovichian physics,
this qualitative description of what Boskovich's math showed, that the world is endless points
of force, all acting and exerting against one another, and manifesting the way that they
push against the other forces according to the distance that they act.
Or we might say the scale at which the force manifests.
And so Whitlock writes that in this way Nietzsche went beyond Spinoza, Kant, Lange, Uberweg,
Helmholtz, and all the Newtonian mechanists.
Whitlock writes, quote, Nietzsche sought to take the tradition another step further into
point particle theory, and to what he would soon call his, quote, force point world, end
quote.
So by doing this, Nietzsche is trying to get over what you might call sort of like the
epistemological baggage he's picked up from his biggest influence.
It's the transcendental idealism of Schopenhauer.
And that sort of, we might say is inherited from the teleology of Spinoza.
Nietzsche is trying to complete this vision of a strictly material world, which was first
abdumbrated by democratists, you know, he gave us the rough outline.
But Nietzsche knows that his biggest influence philosophically, Schopenhauer, can't help
him here because Schopenhauer is not a materialist.
And so Nietzsche has to therefore avoid the objections to materialism that figures such
as Schopenhauer had raised.
Schopenhauer used an argument that is very logical.
If one operates from the first principle set by Kant, which Schopenhauer accepts, the
starting premise of this argument is that we never directly experience a mind independent
reality and that everything we experience is just a representation.
Schopenhauer's argument is that then that means the atoms themselves are only a representation.
It's something I sort of referenced last week when we were talking, I referenced Donald
Hoffman last week.
I think I called him David Hoffman, which was just a genuine mistake, but I looked it up
and his name is actually Donald David Hoffman.
So congrats to me because I technically didn't misname him.
But Hoffman remarks upon his realization as a neurologist that looking at a neuron is
sort of like looking at a pixel.
It's the mind's representation.
It's a placeholder for something out there in reality.
It's not the reality itself.
So Schopenhauer essentially makes the same argument about the atom.
And even if you find the bedrock unit of matter, from which you hope to explain all material
things, all material processes, you're still just explaining it by way of representation.
And that the representation is something indirectly given as Schopenhauer puts it, right?
It's not the fundamental reality.
It's just a symbol of it.
And so attempting to explain reality by way of representation is compared to Munchausen
pulling himself up out of the marsh by pulling out on his own suspenders, right?
Or in some versions of the myth, it's by his hair.
It's where we get the phrase pulling yourself up by your bootstraps, right?
It's something that can't be done.
Longa carried on this idea of representation from Kant just as Schopenhauer had done.
But he became open to Schopenhauer's arguments against materialism because Longa wished to
account for representation through the physiology.
He's giving a physiological and thus a materialistic accounting of what representation is, right?
Because obviously if the physiology produces representations and the physiology is itself
known to us through representations we have of it, aren't we assuming what we're trying
to prove by appealing to physiology as the explanation, right, for representation?
And so your mind can kind of get tied in knots if you think about this too much.
Longa devotes a great deal of his history of materialism to reconcile these contradictions
and defend materialism as a solid grounding for science.
He took the time to really take Schopenhauer's philosophical arguments seriously and try
and rebut them.
And so Nietzsche was content to let Longa's arguments on that front do his work for him.
And maybe the simplest way to say this without getting too bogged down on this issue is that
I sort of paraphrase the argument from Nietzsche himself last week.
We can't take the representation as the most fundamental thing because it would mean that
our sense organs are themselves the representations of our organs.
And so it doesn't seem that we actually gain anything by appealing to the framework of
representation in order to object to materialism, right?
At best that would just be an argument that we can't make statements about the basis of
reality as it transcends the human mind.
But supposing we take it as a given that that's not what science is doing, that we're making
statements about the phenomenal world as we experience it, then there's really no problem.
And that's what science is doing.
So materialism, I think, Longa is correct, can serve as a basis for science.
And Schopenhauer's metaphysical objections to that are a bit sort of, I don't know, they're
a bit old and contrived.
And Nietzsche feels he can get over Schopenhauer's metaphysical objections and therefore fully
go all in on the materialist project and use Boskovich to complete it.
And Whitlock summarizes, quote, Nietzsche could rest assured that Schopenhauer's old
metaphysical arguments alone would not refute materialism, whereas Friedrich Albert Longa
stood between Kant and materialism, however Nietzsche went beyond both by rejecting their
shared presuppositions of extended Newtonian matter of the corpuscular atom.
To do so, he embraced the iconoclastic thought of someone rejected by both Kant and Longa,
namely Boskovich, and thus, at the end of his lecture on Democritus, Nietzsche soundly
dismisses Schopenhauer's argument and accepts Longa's materialism as a provisional hypothesis
until theoretical emendations can be made, end quote.
And so the way in which Nietzsche is influenced is interesting, but just as much so the way
Nietzsche goes against prior figures in the history of science is at least as informative
for our purposes.
Nietzsche believed that in Boskovich, therefore, he's overcome the problem of motion, which
obtained in the Newtonian and Kantian model, and had prompted Schopenhauer to say that
scientific explanations always reach for occult forces, explanations which are not themselves
explicable, and this problem dates back to Spinoza's own deus ex machina of using God
to shore up the hypothesis.
Spinoza, the language he uses, he drew upon the concept which originates in classical antiquity
and had been used by Descartes as well of Canatus.
Canatus is defined as a tendency within bodies for movement.
Obviously we can't stop there with our definition because that would be a just so argument.
It's an argument by definition, like the very thing Schopenhauer's criticizing as just
being an occult force or the way Nietzsche criticizes Kant for saying that we can have
synthetic a priori knowledge by virtue of a faculty.
You're just sort of defining it into existence.
So what is the explanation for Canatus?
What is it on a fundamental level?
And when we get right down to it, it's an expression of the power of God is how Spinoza
can explain it.
His conception of Canatus sees it as an inherent aspect within physical bodies, driving them
towards movement, and that it expresses the power of God.
And furthermore, he specifies that it constitutes a striving, particularly a striving to exist,
and that the striving constituted the actual essence of individual phenomena.
And so if this sounds like Schopenhauer's philosophy, we can see the definite parallels
and Schopenhauer's conception of the will to live.
Will in Schopenhauer's philosophy is, if not teleological, a sort of metaphysical explanation
for reality, which appeals to something not given by empirical experiment.
Schopenhauer, if not a teleologist, you know, he's a transcendental idealist, and he's
thus opposed to the project of materialism, as we've said.
And so the atheistic Schopenhauer is still perfectly willing to say that all things have
an essence, an inner character, which is universal and merely expresses itself in different manifestations,
which is defined by Schopenhauer as will.
Canatus is a clear influence on the idea of will.
It's also an inner essence.
It's a striving to exist.
And so Schopenhauer, just as Spinoza, is defiant towards any attempt to reduce his conception
to purely material explanations.
Nietzsche's leap from Democritus to Boskovich is the way Nietzsche sees it.
It's a resolution to the problem.
There's always been that gap into which God flows.
God flows into science, right?
And so while Nietzsche, maybe something instructive here is that Nietzsche considered the eliatics,
like Parmenides and Zeno, to be a dead end in the development of Greek scientific thought.
But they are instructive to us in that way, insofar as they deal with the problem of motion
by denying it altogether, right?
He says that motion is an illusion.
Zeno, in his famous paradox, shows how motion, when rendered into quantity, becomes absurd.
Its infinite divisibility makes nonsense of our own conception of movement in the passage
of time.
So motion is so problematic that some philosophers just deny that it's real, since it was unreasonable
for it to exist.
And so this is, you know, to Nietzsche, it's a dead end, because it doesn't really get
us any closer to reckoning with the reality of the phenomenal world as we experience it.
And so, in the history of science and the history of philosophy, we've marched on in
spite of the absurdity of motion, always, even if we have to account for it by making
reference to God.
Something not dissimilar to Parmenides is a conception of true being.
We have to make reference to this static, eternal, unchanging reality, God in the machine,
making the machine function, either as a first cause or as pantheism or whatever.
And so what's happened here is that our final explanations are not rational.
Our accounting of the physical world doesn't rise to the standards of what's permissible
as a rational explanation.
And so Whitlock writes that Nietzsche, quote, acquired what we might call his second order
theory of truth.
This second order principle requires that all first order theories be only representations
within a deeper underlying will, so that an adequate theory of matter must understand
matter as a representation of will and not as a thing in itself.
Note that this still allows work on a first order theory of nature, but only within the
confines of the second order theory of theories.
Nietzsche believed that a great leap, even a revolution as grand as that of Copernicus,
would be affected if a first order theory were to abandon Newtonian corpuscular atomism
and shift paradigms to a force point conception of the world.
Boscovician point particle theory overturned the Newtonian spinosist paradigm of extended
matter, bringing first order theory of nature into line with second order principles.
By reinterpreting Schopenhauer's notion of will, originally derived from Spinoza's
idea of Cognitus, in terms of an extended force point, all spinosistic metaphysics,
even substance, would be rendered useless.
Like Kant, Nietzsche would then be in a position to create the world from an unordered chaos,
a world as will to power.
So here we have it, Nietzsche's will to power is, in one sense, a response to centuries
of debates in the philosophy of science, an attempt to philosophize about the world in
such a way that is adequately reflective of the force point world of Boscovitch, which
to Nietzsche is the only way to understand the world materialistically in a consistent
manner, in which our theories and our principles completely align and shift things away from
the stubborn teleology of Spinoza, the deus ex machina of Kant and Newton into a pure materialism
described by a single force that merely manifests itself in various phenomenal forms.
In other words, Nietzsche is talking about a fundamental will, and this is what Boscovitch's
single mathematical principle represents to Nietzsche, that fundamental will in a quantitative
form.
Here's another quotation from Whitlock, quote,
The anti-teleological motives on Nietzsche's part suggest not that he was a nihilist seeking
to enlist science in his campaign against religion, but rather that he was already searching
for his own scientific hypothesis, one that would prove anathema to the real nihilists,
those Europeans who all still clung to a belief in God.
He found the scientific vision to be exhilarating and associated it with the tragic Heraklitean-Dianisian
perspective he had discovered philologically.
It proved to him a source of pessimism out of strength, not nihilism, end quote.
So as we talked about last time, these lecture notes on the pre-platonics speak to a deep
scientific interest, and throughout the pre-platonic lectures, we have Nietzsche's various references
to the Kant-Laplace hypothesis, you know, that's the hypothesis, the universe came from
a disordered gaseous state and was formed by physical laws into the various forms that
exist today.
We have references to von Beyer's pulse rate experiments, or thought experiment, I don't
want to see it, his discussion of Paracelsus and Lavassier.
These digressions in the lectures are numbered at seven and named by Aniandres and Karl Schlechter
as quote, seven excursions into the natural sciences end quote.
Aniandres then wrote the following synopsis of the implications of Nietzsche's interest
in the natural sciences and the references that Nietzsche brings up and how he uses them.
He writes, quote, if we now summarize from the seven excursions what characterizes the
natural sciences for Nietzsche, it would be the following three fundamental matters of
concern, one, to comprehend nature as one continuous becoming, two, to explain order
in it, nature, by means of purposeless, simple forces, and three, to conceive qualities
as quantities.
In contrast, the question of the essence of matter, as it might be posed for example in
relation to Democritus's theory, plays no role for Nietzsche.
He finds himself in complete agreement with natural science.
It too brackets the question of the essence of matter.
Nietzsche will later demonstrate this impressively with regard to the Boscovician system end quote.
So in the pre-plutonic figures Nietzsche discovers for himself clarity about the activity of the
sciences, Thales, Annex Cyminder, and so on, contemplated nature as one continuous becoming,
insofar as they attempted to find the fundamental nature of matter from which all other forms
can be derived.
The attempts to explain nature by means of purposeless and simple forces occur throughout
the work of Annex Agoras or Democritus.
And the last trait of conceiving qualities as quantities, we see that in full force in
the later Pythagoreans.
They are distinguished by Nietzsche from Pythagoras himself.
Pythagoras himself is supposed to be more of a mythical cult-like figure.
The Pythagoreans, on the other hand, gave mathematical explanations of everything, of
music, of space, of all sorts of qualities and relationships.
And this is sort of what it means to translate qualities into quantities.
So it's like, if Democritus is atomism, Democritus plus the later Pythagoreans sort of together
birth this mathematical atomism, which is the way we think about science today, yet again,
right?
And so the ultimate scientific achievement in Nietzsche's eyes is the creation of a single
law to describe all patterns and relationships, makes nature into one single continuous becoming,
and then what is the third thing Annie Ender says, translates this into mathematical form.
Newton believed that the laws governing physical bodies could not be reduced to less than three
laws.
Baskovic, meanwhile, has a single law, right?
And so, and with this one mathematical statement, Baskovic connects gravity, chemistry, electricity,
cohesion, attraction, and repulsion.
And so with the Baskovician system, Nietzsche can rebuild the world from the ground up with
will to power as the basis.
It's because of this sort of the mathematicizing of the world of the later Pythagoreans, Baskovic
is called the modern Pythagoras.
This is in the words of Baskovic's biographer Lancelot Law White.
He says that Baskovic is, quote, Pythagoras extended to cover process, end quote.
And so, you know, White's assessment of Pythagoras is sort of at variance with what Nietzsche
had to say about Pythagoras.
So we can just take it that by calling Baskovic a Pythagoras extended to cover process.
He's referring more to Pythagorean philosophy as expressed by the later Pythagoreans.
Baskovic can be associated with the later Pythagoreans because, you know, these figures
come after a democratist and similarly, you know, for Nietzsche's purposes, he's charting
a course of how materialism develops emerging in post-enlightenment Europe just as it did
in ancient Greece.
And so Baskovic is the figure to stand sort of in correspondence to the later Pythagoreans
and thus completing the materialism that we see in the Greek arena emerging with democratists.
And with Baskovic, we can finally give the material explanation for things like consciousness,
mind, values, and so on.
Or if not Baskovic himself, Nietzsche can take the Baskovician basis and weave that into
his philosophy.
I'm going to look at one final quote from Whitlock's commentary here because, I mean,
he does such a good job throughout this, but here he describes the similarity between the
ancient Pythagorean worldview and Baskovic.
And he gives us an overall picture of how Baskovician point particle theory sits in
relation to Newton and Leibniz.
Chemistry, atomism, Pythagoreanism, overlapped with Nietzsche's intensive and extensive
interest in Baskovic.
A far greater importance, however, is the Pythagorean construction of the world from
points.
Points in motion constitute lines, intersecting lines create surfaces, surfaces connect to
make the Pythagorean five regular solids.
It is precisely in this regard that Baskovic is known as Pythagoras extended to cover process.
For such solids made of points, though not of five types, in physical processes are what
Baskovic's theory attempted to describe.
Baskovic also began with an image of the world as a vast mass of points in motion, interacting
dynamically and kinematically in pairs.
He constructed solid objects from these points and even described physical processes by
reference to a point particle world.
Unlike the Pythagoreans, Baskovic saw his points as subject to inertia, retraction,
sorry, attraction, and repulsion as a function of their distance from each other rather than
of sheer number.
Baskovic was eclipsed as the greatest European mind of his time only by two contemporaries,
Sir Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz.
The inventors of calculus, Newton and Leibniz embraced corpuscular atomism and monodology,
respectively.
Baskovic purposely devised a point particle theory between Newton and Leibniz, but his
system would suffer highs and lows of respectability, until the advent of Michael Faraday, James
Clark Maxwell, Lord Kelvin, and other late 19th century scientists who acknowledged his
genius.
Leibniz's monodology was closely related to Nietzsche's own experimental time atomism,
but Nietzsche rejected Leibniz's windowless monads for the Baskovician principle of action
at a distance.
Baskovic's centers of force were to have inertia and forces dependent on the distance
between two points.
Nevertheless, even Baskovic's dynamic properties and non corpuscular atomism, his action at
a distance in field theory, did not posit an inner driving force.
Baskovician force is external.
By conceiving of the will to power as the inner dynamic, Nietzsche would go beyond Baskovic
and Leibniz, though he would only rarely refer to Baskovic by name in his major published
works.
After his study of the pre-plotonics, interpreted through the light of the modern philosophers
of science, in which Nietzsche finds the culmination of this project in Democritus and the later
Pythagoreans, and then in his own day in Baskovic, the only remaining element Nietzsche needs
is the will to power, in order to provide qualitative expression of the world.
And of course, this expression includes the mind itself, Nietzsche, and the willing subject,
the conscious subject, all of us are the will to power expressing itself.
Nietzsche can explain philosophy through his new theory because he, like all philosophers,
is an avatar of the faculty of reason attempting to bound the world, which is yet another form
of these quantas of power attempting to push against and overcome other things, or overcome
resistance and challenges.
Nietzsche thus encounters kindred spirits in his study, which is another thing he gains
from this, it's not just his philosophy of science, so for example, his favorite is of
course Heraclitus, but this should not overshadow the other admirable forerunners of Nietzsche's
task and philosophy, especially figures like Democritus.
But Nietzsche goes beyond all his influences, he goes beyond Longa by involving Baskovic
in his system at all, and he even goes beyond Baskovic by sort of drawing on the Schopenhauerian
idea of an inner content or essence.
Nietzsche finishes his lecture on the later Pythagoreans with another cryptic remark that,
quote, if only the Pythagoreans really knew what calculates the world, end quote.
The implication is perhaps the will to power, but Nietzsche didn't really have that exact
formulation at this point in his thought.
Maybe he had the notion of it, but not the words, so we don't really know, maybe we'll
simply be left to wonder about that.
Now, okay, let's take a look at some of the more extreme and therefore more interesting
statements that Nietzsche makes about will to power, where he seems to speak of it not
merely as a psychological explanation, but as the single force that explains the world.
We can even see this kind of talk about will to power in at least one place in Nietzsche's
public or published work.
It's a passage that's particularly instructive because even though Nietzsche puts material
in quotation marks in this passage and seems to raise questions about some of the things
he might have taken for granted during his philological period, his pre-philosophical
period, this passage makes a lot more sense in light of this physical aspect of the will
to power, and it makes a lot less sense if you're thinking of will to power in a purely
psychological sense.
So we're going to look at Beyond Good and Evil, aphorism 36, which I've slightly abridged.
Quote,
mechanistic or material world?
In the end, not only is it permitted to make this experiment, the conscience of method
demands it.
Not to assume several kinds of causality, until the experiment of making do with a single
one has been pushed to its utmost limit, to the point of nonsense if I may say so.
That is a moral of method which one may not shirk today.
It follows from its definition, as a mathematician would say.
The question is, in the end, whether we really recognize the will as efficient, whether we
believe in the causality of the will.
If we do, and at bottom, our faith in this is nothing less than our faith in causality
itself, then we have to make the experiment of positing the causality of the will hypothetically
as the only one.
Will of course can only affect will and not matter, not nerves, for example.
In short, one has to risk the hypothesis whether will does not affect will wherever
effects are recognized, and whether all mechanical occurrences are not, insofar as a force is
active in them, will force effects of will.
Suppose finally we succeeded in explaining our entire instinctive life as the development
and ramification of one basic form of the will, namely of the will to power as my proposition
has it.
Suppose all organic functions can be traced back to this will to power, and one could
also find in it the solution of the problem of procreation and nourishment.
It is one problem, and then one would have gained the right to determine all efficient
force univocally as will to power.
The world viewed from inside, the world defined and determined according to its intelligible
character, would be will to power and nothing else.
And so I think the very peculiar thing about Hanitius thought developed after this initial
immersion in materialism and anti-teleology, it's the idea that he retains from that period
is the quest to render an expression of the world in as few principles as possible, and
to do it without appeal to these God and the machine explanations.
And so here he says, let's take one form of causality that we know is real, or rather
because in the context of the first book of Beyond Good Nievil, he's been very clear
in his statements on truth and sort of pointing out we don't actually know that it's real,
but this is the thing that we have perhaps the most faith in, which is that the will
is a causal force, right?
And let's take that one principle and push it through to its ultimate conclusions, even
to the point of absurdity.
And so what does that mean where he's saying our belief in the will is synonymous with
our belief in causality?
I mean, he's saying that in our own experience, we experience volition as a causal force.
Whether it's free or not free, this is true for Nietzsche, either way, it's his way of
talking about what people might call the experience of making choices, whether the choice is freely
made or not.
For Nietzsche, it's the will itself rather than rational, deliberative intellect that
causes our actions.
And so if it's permitted to talk of causes at all, then the cause is will.
This is the only immediate reality that we know.
Why not begin from this position that will is the only given?
Because the only given is our experience.
So it would mean therefore that will cannot affect quote unquote matter, but only other
expressions or centers of will.
Since we've already said that will is the only reality.
Why not begin from the position of viewing the world from inside, from its intelligible
character, the only thing that is given or intelligible to us?
And so the fundamental character of matter, that matter would simply be the mind symbol
for representing it, but the fundamental character of matter as a sort of experiment, as the
way Nietzsche phrases it, conceive of matter as basically being will, will being the essence
of matter.
So that might be one sense I kind of disagree with Whitlock, or maybe he's correct about
Nietzsche during the period of the, when he's lecturing as a philologist.
But I think later he does sort of come down in the ideas that once he starts thinking
about will to power as an inner force or an inner intelligible character, he is not bracketing
the question of matter, essence of matter any longer, he is asking what it is.
But it's still just an experiment, right?
But Nietzsche says that his proposition of describing the most fundamental and single
unifying principle as will to power is the only single philosophical principle one can
use, which describes all efficient force in the world, which is very interesting.
Like that, you know, it's more explanatory than Schopenhauer's will to live or Spinoza's
canatus.
That's what he's saying here.
And so that if you're just thinking about will to power as a moral or psychological
principle, the full force of that power doesn't really come through, or of that passage doesn't
really come through that he's saying will to power is the true character of the world
first and foremost, and that that's the most explanatory lens we have at the moment in
order to talk about it.
This issue, I think, is clarified in his notes.
This is in will to power number 619, quote, the victorious concept force by means of
which our physicists have created God in the world still needs to be completed, an inner
will must be ascribed to it, which I designate as will to power, i.e. an insatiable desire
to manifest power, whereas the employment and exercise of power as a creative drive,
etc. Physicists cannot eradicate action at a distance from their principles, nor can
they eradicate a repellent force or an attracting one.
There is nothing for it.
One is obliged to understand all motion, all appearances, all laws, only a symptoms of
an inner event, and to employ man as an analogy to this end.
In the case of an animal, it is possible to trace all its drives to the will to power.
Likewise, all the functions of organic life to this one source, end quote.
So while those rigorous scientific minds of today who may be listening may have borne
with me for quite a while in this discussion, we're getting to the point that Nietzsche's
views maybe are having less value towards answering questions and philosophy of science.
But maybe the best takeaway is that we're gaining an insight into the way Nietzsche
thinks and that he has a valid criticism in the fact that we're content to say that things are,
what is it?
Well, it's a force without giving some definitive content by which we can describe what it means
to invoke a force.
And his idea of what it means to invoke a force is that this concept is yet another
manifestation of will to power.
And we can see his defense of Boskovich on this passage, even though Boskovich goes unnamed,
he defends action at a distance, which is central to Boskovich's theory.
And that his single mathematical expression explains the behavior of nature as it manifests
differently depending on the scale of distance involved.
And Nietzsche references a repellent and attractive forces keyed to the description
of Boskovich's force point particles.
He references it in relation to will to power, which means that he is thinking about will to power
in a physical sense, right?
Sense of physics.
Now, some of his later notes as we go further into his career,
as we've talked about, he ends up taking a somewhat dim view of mechanism
and thought that materialism taken too far itself sort of becomes a bit metaphysical.
And I think that's because of the problem of causality,
which I think Nietzsche genuinely doesn't believe that we can derive causality from anything,
right?
That we're left regarding causality as either a sort of like artifact of our representation
of the world, which means it's not independent of the human mind,
or else we have to call it a sort of metaphysical force like Canatus, right?
So mechanistic explanations don't ultimately do it for Nietzsche.
And because of his insistence that the most real thing is the intelligible character,
that's the only thing that's actually a given, that matters should basically,
we should start from the position that matter is will to power.
Then it's less important for him to present a mechanistic world in the sense that everything
is governed by cause and effect, as it is to present the idea that the various phenomenal
forms are simply can all be bounded within the explanation of Baskovician unified field theory,
right?
In the note numbered 624, Nietzsche argues against the physical atom.
And so here he takes the inverse position that transforming qualities into quantities is in
any way a useful thing when Nietzsche writes, quote, the calculability of the world,
the expressibility of all events and formulas, is this really comprehension?
How much of a piece of music has been understood when that in it which is calculable and can be
reduced to formulas has been reckoned up, end quote.
And he even acknowledges in the note number 627 that attraction and repulsion,
which are central aspects of Baskovician physics, are fictions.
And he says that this attempt to think about the world in a purely mechanistic sense is a desire
to see causality everywhere.
And he goes so far as to say in that note that quote, the belief in cause falls with the belief
in tele, parentheses, against Spinoza and his causalism, end quote.
And so with everything we've talked about, that should be rather clear, right?
It's a he's actually giving a rather radical view that seriously depends on the fact that
departs from his earlier views as we've covered them in this talk, that to say that any belief
in cause and effect constitutes a teleology, which Nietzsche will therefore oppose.
And so Nietzsche's complex views on causality, I mean, I've said it, I think elsewhere,
or I think I might have brought it up in a Q&A, which is not going to be out yet to the public,
but I might have to do an episode just strictly on causality.
It's probably not going to be for a little while.
But it really complicates the issue.
It complicates the understanding of later Nietzsche's views of science rather considerably.
But we also find in the notes collected in Will to Power, a clear continuation of Nietzsche's quest
to reshape the world into something which is fundamentally only Will to Power.
And to understand Will to Power is something all pervasive, something constitutive of,
constitutive, I have so much trouble with that word, of all phenomena.
And so Will to Power is something which is descriptive of all becoming,
an attempt to bound the boundless just as the prepletonics like Democritus were doing.
And I think in his unpublished notes that we have in the Will to Power collection,
Nietzsche is in his more ambitious moments.
He thinks he has this element of Will to Power which would allow him to take Democritus,
take Boskovich, and move on to this fundamental unifying theory that accounts for purposefulness
and movement and procreation and nourishment.
I'm going to be perfectly honest with all of you when I say that at the end of this,
I still have a hard time wrapping my brain around everything Nietzsche is getting at
in his philosophy of science.
And insofar as Will to Power can be understood as a natural or physical principle.
And this is part of the reason why I think Nietzsche did not publish some of his more
radical statements about Will to Power.
It's why he only mentions Boskovich very rarely in his published work.
I think there's a concern that his statements might be misunderstood or misrepresented,
or taken in a teleological or religious sense.
Perhaps Nietzsche's skepticism of causality or his awareness of the contingency of all human
perspective or similar such concerns led him to regard such a grand unifying
philosophical theory as being impure thinking.
This might be why Nietzsche abandoned the idea of Will to Power as a planned magnum opus.
Maybe he considered it was just better not to go there and let these ideas remain in the
background of his published works.
Something which informs his ideas and informs the way he thinks,
but it's best not to bring it into the foreground because of the misunderstandings
that there could be.
On the other hand, with this more scientifically rich understanding of what the Will to Power
can be, I think we should now consider one of the most infamous passages of Nietzsche's work.
And it's actually the very last passage contained in the collection of unpublished notes
in Will to Power.
It's rightfully infamous because if you haven't engaged with the full breadth of Nietzsche's
ideas, such a passage can be really dangerous, I think, but it's one of the finest examples
of gorgeous overflowing Nietzschean prose.
And I think it attains a powerful subtlety of meaning in light of these considerations
of Nietzsche's scientific influences.
And so the last note in Will to Power aphorism 1067, quote,
And do you know what the world is to me?
Shall I show it to you in my mirror?
This world, a monster of energy without beginning, without end.
A firm iron magnitude of force that does not grow bigger or smaller,
that does not expend itself but only transforms itself as a whole of unalterable size,
a household without expenses or losses, but likewise without increase or income,
enclosed by nothingness as by a boundary, not something blurry or wasted,
not something endlessly extended, but set in a definite space as a definite force,
and not a space that might be empty here or there, but rather as a force throughout,
as a play of forces and waves of forces, at the same time one and many,
increasing here and at the same time decreasing there, a sea of forces flowing and rushing
together, eternally changing, eternally flooding back, with tremendous years of recurrence,
with an ebb and a flood of its forms, out of the simplest forms striving towards the most
complex, out of the stillest, most rigid, coldest forms striving towards the hottest,
most turbulent, most self-contradictory, and then again returning home to the simple,
out of this abundance, out of the play of contradictions, back to the joy of concord,
still affirming itself in this uniformity of its courses and its years,
blessing itself as that which must return eternally,
as a becoming that knows no satiety, no disgust, no weariness,
this, my Dionysian world of the eternally self-creating, the eternally self-destroying,
this mystery world of the twofold voluptuous delight, my beyond good and evil, without goal,
unless the joy of the circle is itself a goal, without will, unless a ring feels good will
towards itself," end quote. And so what do we find in this description of the world?
It is a totality of unalterable size, not something blurry and undefined,
and not endlessly extended. To Nietzsche the world is something definite,
with definite boundaries and definite size. So it's not the indefinite of Anaximander, right?
And it's ruled by transformations, dynamism of forms arising and passing away.
Even though the total size, the totality of matter itself does not alter. So the fundamental,
you know, we could say the fundamental material of the world changes in shape and arrangement,
but nothing is created or destroyed. It's a household without expenses or losses,
without increase or income. So the similarities there to Democritus and to Anaxagoras,
and even to Heraclitus are very clear. And what else does Nietzsche say about this world of his?
Quote, a play of forces and waves of forces at the same time one in many, increasing here and at
the same time decreasing there, a sea of forces flowing and rushing together eternally changing,
end quote. This is the multiplicity of phenomena within the world of becoming.
And these separate phenomena are really centers of force,
force points, if you will, flowing and rushing and pushing against one another.
This one force pervades everywhere. So Boskovich, right? And everywhere, what do we find? Recurrence.
The simple strives towards the complex, the hot towards the cold.
So we even see preplotonic forces that were incorporated into the Nietzschean world,
right? Warmth and cold and attraction and repulsion,
you know, the voice of Anaximida and Empedocles. And we might consider also how Nietzsche understands
will to power as manifesting in life forms, which start as young and vigorous and grow into maturity,
and then their energy leaves them and they decline eventually. And so he sees strength
as expanding until it eventually declines, something which bursts forth and then passes away.
He sees weakness or dissolution as ever recursive, always arising again to break down the various
manifestations of will. And taking influence from Heraclitus, he sees this world as essentially
innocent. It's beyond good and evil. It knows no disgust, no satiety. So he would reject the
Empedoclean view of a metaphysical reality to love or hatred or the Schopenhauerian view of life,
reducing to satiety and boredom, you know, this eternal suffering of desire and want.
To Nietzsche, this world is eternally creating and eternally destroying,
but it's ever innocent and self affirming. It's the innocence of becoming, the play of Aeon,
the boy god of the zodiac, building sand castles on the beach and knocking them down.
The world, just like the play of a child, has no goal, unless the circle itself is the goal,
right? So in other words, no telos. We can only observe the pattern which the world produces
blindly, which is endless recursion, the eternal spin of these forces manifesting creation,
and then bringing on destruction in an endless repeating dance. So Nietzsche then tells us,
in no uncertain terms, his central principle is the unity, the sole law or formulation from which
he gets his picture of what the world is. And the ending of this passage is so good that,
now I've done most of the commentary already, you know, and I've talked for a long time. So
we're just going to end here with Nietzsche's words. Nietzsche concludes, quote,
Do you want a name for this world, a solution for all of its riddles,
a light for you too, you best concealed strongest, most intrepid, most midnightly men.
This world is the will to power and nothing besides. And you yourselves are also this will
to power and nothing besides end quote. That's all everyone signing off.
you